****FOMCpresconf20200916

. Good afternoon. At the Federal Reserve, we are strongly committed to achieving the monetary policy goals that Congress has given us—maximum employment and price stability. Since the beginning of the pandemic, we have taken forceful actions to provide some relief and stability, to ensure that the recovery will be as strong as possible, and to limit lasting damage to the economy. Today my colleagues on the Federal Open Market Committee and I made some important changes to our policy statement, including an update to our guidance for the likely path of our policy interest rate. Guided by our new Statement on Longer Run Goals and Monetary Policy Strategy that we announced a few weeks ago, these changes clarify our strong commitment over a longer time horizon. Before describing today’s policy actions, let me briefly review recent economic developments. Economic activity has picked up from its depressed second quarter level, when much of the economy was shut down to stem the spread of the virus. With the reopening of many businesses and factories and fewer people withdrawing from social interactions, household spending looks to have recovered about three quarters of its earlier decline. Nonetheless, spending on services that typically require people to gather closely, including travel and hospitality, is still quite weak. The recovery in household spending also likely owes to federal stimulus payments and expanded unemployment benefits, which provided substantial and timely support to household incomes. Activity in the housing sector has returned to its level at the beginning of the year, and we are starting to see signs of an improvement in business investment. The recovery has progressed more quickly than generally expected, and forecasts from FOMC participants for economic growth this year have been revised up since our June Summary of Economic Projections. Even so, overall activity remains well below its level before the pandemic and the path ahead remains highly uncertain. In the labor market, roughly half of the 22 million jobs that were lost in March and April have been regained as many people returned to work. The unemployment rate declined over the past four months but remains elevated at 8.4 percent as of August. Although we welcome this progress, we will not lose sight of the millions of Americans who remain out of work. Looking ahead, FOMC participants project the unemployment rate to continue to decline  the median projection is 7.6 percent at the end of this year, 5.5 percent next year, and 4 percent by 2023. The economic downturn has not fallen equally on all Americans, and those least able to shoulder the burden have been hardest hit. In particular, the high level of joblessness has been especially severe for lower wage workers in the services sector, for women, and for African Americans and Hispanics. The economic dislocation has upended many lives and created great uncertainty about the future. The pandemic has also left a significant imprint on inflation. For some goods, including food, supply constraints have led to notably higher prices, adding to the burden for those struggling with lost income. More broadly, however, weaker demand, especially in sectors that have been most affected by the pandemic, has held down consumer prices, and overall, inflation is running well below our 2 percent longer run objective. The median inflation projection from FOMC participants rises from 1.2 percent this year to 1.7 percent next year and reaches 2 percent in 2023. As the economy began its recovery, COVID 19 cases, hospitalizations, and deaths also rose. The reimposition of some social distancing restrictions as well as more cautious behavior by many individuals have succeeded in slowing the spread of the virus. As we have emphasized throughout the pandemic, the outlook for the economy is extraordinarily uncertain and will depend in large part on our success in keeping the virus in check. All of us have a role to play in our nation’s response to the pandemic. Following the advice of public health professionals to keep appropriate social distances and to wear masks in public will help get the economy back to full strength. A full economic recovery is unlikely until people are confident that it is safe to reengage in a broad range of activities. The path forward will also depend on the policy actions taken across all parts of the government to provide relief and to support the recovery for as long as needed. The Federal Reserve’s response to this crisis has been guided by our mandate to promote maximum employment and stable prices for the American people, along with our responsibilities to promote the stability of the financial system. We remain committed to using our full range of tools to support the economy in this challenging time. The changes we made in today’s policy statement reflect our strategy to achieve our dual  mandate goals by seeking to eliminate shortfalls from maximum employment and achieve inflation that averages 2 percent over time, as we articulated in our Statement on Longer Run Goals and Monetary Policy Strategy. We view maximum employment as a broad based and inclusive goal and do not see a high level of employment as posing a policy concern unless accompanied by signs of unwanted increases in inflation or the emergence of other risks that could impede the attainment of our goals. And we believe that achieving inflation that averages 2 percent over time helps ensure that longer term inflation expectations remain well anchored at our longer run 2 percent objective. In turn, well anchored inflation expectations enhance our ability to meet both our employment and inflation objectives, particularly in the new normal in which interest rates are closer to their effective lower bound even in good times. Hence, as we say in our statement, with inflation running persistently below 2 percent, we “will aim to achieve inflation moderately above 2 percent for some time so that inflation averages 2 percent over time and longer term inflation expectations remain well anchored at 2 percent.” We expect “to maintain an accommodative stance of monetary policy until these outcomes”—including maximum employment—“are achieved.” With regard to interest rates, we now indicate that we expect it will be appropriate to maintain the current 0 to ¼ percent target range for the federal funds rate “until labor market conditions have reached levels consistent with the Committee’s assessments of maximum employment and inflation has risen to 2 percent and is on track to moderately exceed 2 percent for some time.” In addition, over coming months we will continue to increase our “holdings of Treasury securities and agency mortgage backed securities at least at the current pace.” These asset purchases are intended “to sustain smooth market functioning and help foster accommodative financial conditions, thereby supporting the flow of credit to households and businesses.” We believe the strong policy guidance we are providing today will serve the economy well by promoting our goals through the many possible paths the recovery may take. Of course, as we note in our policy statement, we “would be prepared to adjust the stance of monetary policy as appropriate if risks emerge that could impede the attainment of our [the Committee’s] goals.” The Federal Reserve has also been taking broad and forceful actions to more directly support the flow of credit in the economy for households, for businesses large and small, and for state and local governments. Preserving the flow of credit is essential for mitigating the damage to the economy and promoting a robust recovery. Many of our programs rely on emergency lending powers that require the support of the Treasury Department and are available only in very unusual circumstances, such as those we find ourselves in today. These programs serve as a backstop to key credit markets and appear to have restored the flow of credit from private lenders through normal channels. We have deployed these lending powers to an unprecedented extent, enabled, in large part, by financial backing and support from Congress and the Treasury. When the time comes, after the crisis has passed, we will put these emergency tools back in the toolbox. As I have emphasized before, these are lending powers, not spending powers. The Fed cannot grant money to particular beneficiaries. We can only create programs or facilities with broad based eligibility to make loans to solvent entities with the expectation that the loans will be repaid. Many borrowers are benefiting from these programs, as is the overall economy. But for many others, getting a loan that may be difficult to repay may not be the answer. In these cases, direct fiscal support may be needed. Elected officials have the power to tax and spend and to make decisions about where we, as a society, should direct our collective resources. The fiscal policy actions that have been taken thus far have made a critical difference to families, businesses, and communities across the country. Even so, the current economic downturn is the most severe in our lifetimes. It will take a while to get back to the levels of economic activity and employment that prevailed at the beginning of this year, and it may take continued support from both monetary and fiscal policy to achieve that. We understand that our actions affect communities, families, and businesses across the country. Everything we do is in service to our public mission. We are committed to using our full range of tools to support the economy and to help assure that the recovery from this difficult period will be as robust as possible. Finally, I would like to take a moment to recognize the passing of our friend and colleague, Thomas Laubach. His outstanding analysis and advice have been indispensable to the FOMC and have played a key role in the policy decisions that will define this era of the Federal Reserve. He will be remembered for his intellect, but also his kindness, his equanimity, and his dedication to achieving our mission on behalf of the American people. We will miss him. Thank you. I’ll now be glad to take your questions. . Thank you. So we say in our postmeeting statement that we’ll continue to increase our securities holdings “at least at the current pace” over coming months “to sustain smooth market functioning and help foster accommodative financial conditions.” That latter part is an updating of our guidance to reflect what I’ve been saying in these press conferences for some time and what other central banks have acknowledged, which is that the purchases are fostering accommodative financial conditions as well. That amounts to roughly $80 billion a month of Treasuries and $40 billion net per month for MBS. So we do—we do think that these purchases have been effective in, in restoring orderly market conditions and have supported the flow of credit to households and businesses, including by fostering more accommodative financial conditions, which, of course, we think is a good thing. So, in terms of going forward, I would just say this: There are various ways and margins that we can adjust our tools going forward, and we’ll continue to monitor developments. And we’re prepared to adjust our plans as appropriate. . So we, we think our—we think our policy stance is appropriate today, and we’re prepared to adjust it going forward as we, as we see appropriate. And today we believe that particularly this very strong forward guidance—very powerful forward guidance that we’ve announced today will provide strong support for the economy. Effectively, we’re saying that rates will remain highly accommodative until the economy is far along in its recovery, and that, that should be a very powerful statement in supporting economic activity. Now we’re buying $120 billion in securities per month across the—across the Treasury curve. That’s also adding to accommodation. We do have the flexibility to adjust that tool and, and the rate tool and, and other tools as well. But as for right now, we think—we think that our policy setting is appropriate to support the expansion. We did—we said from the beginning that we would first try to provide some support and stability and relief in the first phase of the crisis, the acute phase, and then we would support the expansion when it came. Well, it’s here. And it’s well along. And so that’s why we changed our guidance today, and we do have the flexibility to do more when we think it’s appropriate. . So what we said in our Statement on Longer Run Goals and Monetary Policy Strategy was that the Committee’s policy decisions reflect “its longer run goals, its medium term outlook, and its assessment[s] of the balance of risks, including risks to the financial system that could impede the attainment of the Committee’s goals.” So that’s what we said about financial stability. And today we said that we’d “be prepared to adjust the stance of monetary policy as appropriate if risks emerge that could impede the attainment of our [the Committee’s] goals.” But you asked specifically about, about financial stability. One thing I would say is that financial—that monetary policy should not be the first line of defense—is not the first line of defense on financial stability. We look to more appropriate tools in the first instance as a first line of defense, and those would be regulation, supervision, high capital, high liquidity, stress testing—all of those things, macroprudential tools. All of those things are, are really the first line of defense on financial stability. But we always leave open the idea that we will not ignore those kinds of risks and other kinds of risks, more broadly, that could impede the attainment of our goals in, in setting monetary policy. So that’s, that’s really how we think about it, but principally that, you know, other tools are the—are the frontline, as I mentioned. . So, you know, what we said again in the [Statement on] Longer Run [Goals and Monetary Policy Strategy]—you know, in our consensus statement is that we, you know—“policy decisions reflect … the balance of risks, including risks to the financial system that could impede the attainment of the Committee’s goals.” So the test would be, you know, does a majority of the Committee feel that, that monetary policy is, is triggering that? And that, that would be—that would be the test. And, you know, it’s not something that we’ve done. We do monitor financial stability concerns, of course, intensely and regularly. We try to use our other tools on them, but we, we do keep them in mind as we think about monetary policy. . Not at all. And, you know, you don’t—you also don’t see people, by and large, lifting off or raising interest rates above zero. I guess there are 4 exceptions out of a Committee of 17 during that—during the forecast period. So we don’t reach 2 percent, but we get very close to it in the forecast. We reach 2 percent—I guess the median is 2 percent at the end of 2023. So, you know, you know what the guidance says. It says that we expect that the current setting of, of our rates will be—what we expect [is] that it will be appropriate until such time as we reach 2 percent inflation, that we feel that labor market conditions are consistent with our assessment of maximum employment, and that we’re on track to achieve inflation moderate—inflation moderately above. So that’s the test. So I don’t think there’s any conflict between those two because, you know, the, the way they’re set up, the projections don’t show the out years. You asked about confidence, and I would say that this, this very strong, very powerful guidance shows both our confidence and our determination. It shows our confidence that we can reach this goal and our determination to do so. . Because it—we think, looking at everything we know about inflation dynamics in the United States and around the world over recent decades, we expect it will take some time. We expect that the economy will recover quickly now, but that that pace will slow as, as people go back to work. And we’ll still have an area of the economy—a big area of the economy—that struggles. There will be slack in the economy. The economy will be below maximum employment, below full demand. And that will tend to wear—to put downward pressure on inflation. So we think that once we get up closer to maximum employment, we think that inflation will come back, generally. And, I mean, that’s sort of what happened during the last long expansion. It’s a slow process, but—but there is a process there. Inflation does move up over time. We do expect that will continue today, and we expect that our, our guidance is powerful and will help that outcome. We think that—that effectively saying that policy will remain highly accommodative until the economy is very far along in its recovery should provide strong support for the economy and get us there sooner rather than later. . Sure. So, first, if you look at the Summary of Economic Projections that my colleagues and I filed for this meeting, what you’ll see is an expectation that the recovery will continue—that it will continue at a reasonable pace through 2021, ’22, and ’23. We do expect that that pace will slow just because you would expect that the, the pace would be fastest right at the beginning of the—right at the beginning of the recovery, because you had such a sharp decline. You would expect that the third quarter should be the fastest gains, and that, after that, the pace should slow down to a more normal pace. So we do expect that. In terms of fiscal policy—you asked about fiscal policy. So, you know, one thing—I guess I would start by saying that the initial response from fiscal authorities was rapid. It was forceful and pretty effective. And we’re seeing the results of that in—today in income and household spending data, in the labor market data, in the construction data, in the data for business equipment spending, and the fact that businesses are staying in business, and, you know, the pace of default and things like that has really slowed. So there’s been a really positive effect. That said, my sense is that more fiscal support is likely to be needed. Of course, the details of that are for Congress, not for the Fed. But I would just say, there are still roughly 11 million people still out of work due to the pandemic, and a good part of those people were working in industries that are likely to struggle. Those people may need additional, additional support as they try to find their way through what will be a difficult time for them. We’ve also got struggling small businesses, especially those in the business of facing directly to the public. And we have state and local governments dealing with a drop in revenue at the same time spending has gone up, much of it related to the pandemic and economic effects. So, again, I would say, the fiscal support has been essential in, in the good progress we see now. And, finally, I’ll note that just about all—the overwhelming majority of, of private forecasters who, who project an ongoing recovery are assuming there will be substantial additional fiscal support. . Well, so we think that the forward guidance we adopted today is appropriate and, as I mentioned, powerful. Effectively, what it says is that we’ll, we will keep policy where it is now—keep the rate policy where it is now until unemployment reaches the Committee’s assessments or levels that are—sorry, not unemployment, labor market conditions reach levels that are consistent with the Committee’s assessments of maximum employment, until inflation reaches 2 percent, and until it’s on track to go above 2 percent moderately for some time. So that’s very strong forward guidance, and we think that that will be durable guidance that will provide significant support to the economy in coming years. So that’s, that’s really our thinking on, on forward guidance on rates. . So, as you know, maximum employment is not—is not something that can be reduced to a number the way inflation can. It’s a broad range of factors. It really always has been and, really, a substantial number of factors that we’ve indicated we would look at. So it’s broader labor conditions, consistent with our Committee’s assessment of maximum employment. So that would certainly mean low unemployment, it would mean high labor force participation, it would mean wages—it would be a whole range of things. And we’re not looking at a rule. We’re looking at a judgmental assessment, which I think we’ll be very transparent about as we—as we go forward. In terms of inflation, you know, this is a Committee that is both confident and committed to—and determined to reach our goals. And the idea that we would look for the, the quickest way out is just—it’s just not who we are. It’s not that—there’s no message of that here. We would not be looking for one month of 2 percent inflation  we said return to 2—to achieve 2 percent inflation. Okay. So just understand that, you know, we’re strongly committed to achieving our goals and the overshoot. So that should tell you about that. Oh, in terms of—okay, in terms of—so, what does “moderate” mean? It means not large. It doesn’t—it means not very high above 2 percent. It means moderate. I think that’s a fairly well understood word. In terms of—in terms of “for a time,” what it means is not permanently and not for a sustained period. You know, we’re, we’re resisting the urge to try to create some sort of a rule or a formula here. And I think the, the public will understand pretty well what we want. It’s actually pretty straightforward. We want to achieve inflation that averages 2 percent over time. And if we do that, inflation expectations will be right at 2 percent, and that’ll help us achieve 2 percent inflation over time and avoid the situation where the central bank loses its ability to support the economy. . So, in terms of the effects, so I think what we’ve done is—is more or less aligned with the consensus statement today. So it’s, it’s in line with what, what might have been expected. As I mentioned, I think over time it will provide very powerful support for this economy as we move forward. In a sense, it’s consistent with expectations, so I don’t—I’m not looking for a big reaction right now. But I think, over time, again, guidance that we expect to retain the current stance until the economy is—has moved very far toward our goals is a strong and powerful thing. And I think that will be supportive of the economy over time. In terms of additional fiscal support, I guess your question is, what would happen if— yes, so, people have different assessments, and, and different participants in the FOMC made different assessments on their own. I think broadly, though, there is an expectation among private forecasters and among FOMC participants that there will be some further fiscal action. And there does seem to be an appetite on the part of all the relevant players to doing something. The question is, how much and when? And so I would just say that if—and it’s very hard to say. So, so far the economy has proven resilient to the—to the lapsing of the—to the, of the CARES Act unemployment— enhanced unemployment benefits. But there’s, there’s certainly a risk, though, that, that those who are unemployed have saved—appear to have saved some of those benefits, and they’ll, they’ll now spend them, and that, as the months pass, if, if there’s no follow up on that, if there isn’t additional support and there isn’t a job for the—some of those people who are, are from industries where, where it’s going to be very hard to find new work, then you’ll—that will start to show up in economic activity. It’ll also show up in things like evictions and foreclosures and, and, you know, things that will scar and damage the economy. So that’s a downside risk. So I, I think the real question is, is, when and how much and what will be the—what will be the contents? And, you know, no one—no one has any certainty around that, but, broadly speaking, if we don’t get that, then there would certainly be downside risks through the— certainly through the channel I mentioned. . So we—you know, we monitor everything we think is important in the U.S. economy. And in that—in a broad sense, all of it goes into thinking about monetary policy. You mentioned inequality. So, you know, disparities in, in income and in financial well  being by various demographic and racial categories is something we monitor carefully. Inequality, which I would point to—it’s a multifaceted thing. But I would point to the relative stagnation of incomes for people at the lower end of the income spectrum and also lower mobility. So those are things that hold back our economy. They are. The thing is, we don’t really have the tools to address those. We, we have interest rates and bank supervision and financial stability policy and things like that, but we can’t—we can’t get at those things through our tools. When we lower the federal funds rate, that supports the economy across a broad range of, of people and activities, but we can’t—we don’t have the ability to target particular groups. Notwithstanding that, we, we do talk about it, because these are important features of our economy. And we—you know, I, I think those are—those distributional issues are, are issues that are really for our elected officials. And I would say, I take them seriously as holding back our economy. The productive capacity of the economy is limited when not everyone has the opportunity, has the educational background and, and the health care and all the things that you need to be an active participant in our workforce. So I think we can—if we want to have the, the highest potential output and the—and the best output for our economy, we need that prosperity to be very broadly spread in the longer run. And I—again, I would just say, the Fed—you know, we can talk about those things a lot. And in, in—when we think about maximum employment in particular, we do look at individual groups. So high unemployment in a particular racial group like African Americans when—you know, we would look at that as we think about whether we’re really at maximum employment. We would look—we would look at that along with a lot of other data. So the answer is, we do look at all those things and, and do what we can with our tools. But, ultimately, these are issues for elected representatives. . So, you know, we think our—we think that our asset purchases are doing both the thing—both those things today. We think, clearly, there’s been great progress, in terms of market function. If you remember, early in the spring when the acute phase of the pandemic hit, market function was very low. And it’s improved rapidly and, and in many respects is, is in a good place now. We also, though, think that these asset purchases, which total $120 billion a month—you know, which is much larger than, for example, the last asset purchase program during the Global Financial Crisis and the recovery therefrom—we think that that’s also providing accommodative financial conditions and supporting growth. And we think that’s fine. We’re also aware that we, we—there are ways we can adjust that, you know, to do various things—you know, make it smaller, make it larger, and also target different sectors of the—of the curve. And, you know, we’re, we’re going to continue to monitor developments, and we’re prepared to adjust our plans as appropriate. . Great. So, on the first one, what’s happening is basically we’re learning to live with—right now, we're learning to live with COVID, which still spreads. And we’re learning to, to engage in economic activity. All of this recovery that we’ve seen is in a context where—you know, where people are still at risk of, of catching it, and yet we’re able to resume lots and lots of economic activities. And that involves, as I mentioned, you know—I think the more social distancing we can preserve as we go back into the workforce—wearing masks, keeping our distance, that kind of thing—the better we’ll be able to get economic activity back up close to where it was. I do think, though, there are areas of the economy that are just going to really struggle until we have an—a vaccine that’s, that’s in wide—you know, wide usage and is, is widely trusted. And those are the ones where people were getting really closely—close together. I also think testing—to the extent you have cheap and rapid testing, you can do a lot with that in the workforce. You can—you can build confidence in the workforce if you have regular—very regular testing that doesn’t cost very much and you get the results really quickly. If you do that, you’ll be able to open a lot of workforces, particularly in cities where the overall case numbers are quite low. And that will help a lot. So I think we’re, we’re going to be finding lots and lots of ways to get out towards—you know, as far as we can. There’s always going to be that—for, for some time, there’s going to be certain activities that will be—that will be hard to, to resume. So I, I think that’s the only way I can say it. And I think trying to—you know, we all—when we make a forecast, we make assessments about that, but it’s really hard to say. There is no template here. There’s no—you know, there’s no experience with this. So, frankly, for the last 60 days or so, the economy’s recovered faster than expected. And that may continue or not. We just don’t know. And I think we should do those things that we control to make sure that we can recover as quickly as possible. And the main thing, again, is wearing a mask and keeping your distance while you’re in the workforce. That’s something we can all do that will limit the spread and let people go back to work, avoid major outbreaks, and things like that. In, in terms of the stress tests, so I really don’t have any—you know, we’re getting ready quite soon to be making announcements and saying things publicly. There’s not much I can say with you—nothing, really, that I can say that’s—on that today. I don’t have anything for you. . Sure. So, a couple things about Main Street. It, it reaches the whole nation. It’s got more than half of the banking industry assets signed up among the banks that are part of it, and it’s making loans. The number is more like—it’s close to $2 billion now. So the numbers are going up. Banks are joining  borrowers are coming. And it’s significant. It’s, it’s relatively small now, but it can scale up in response to economic conditions, should that be— should that be appropriate. You know, if you look out in the lending world, surveys generally find that, that firms are not citing credit constraints as a top problem. And that, that is a lot of PPP, bank credit lines, and syndicated loans. There’s a lot of credit being let out there. So—but you’re right. We, we are looking at some things. We’re looking at—some lenders are concerned about the underwriting expectations. So banks are going to—their approach is likely to be that they’re going to underwrite this loan roughly the same as they underwrite any loan. They’re keeping part of it, and, you know, what, what we want to do is make sure that—that they know that they should take the payment deferrals and other things in, in place, and also that—you know, it’s, it’s really—it’s really a, a facility for, for companies or borrowers that, that don’t have access to, to “regular way” borrowing now. Otherwise, why would we need Main Street? So that’s what we're working on. And we’ll be doing some, some—we’ll be making some changes in that respect. I don’t—I saw what President Rosengren said. I, I can’t really comment directly on that. I just would say that, you know, this is 13(3). If you look at the law under section 13(3), it’s very clear that we are to make loans only to solvent borrowers. And, and the CARES Act is quite specific in keeping all of the terms of, of section 13(3) in effect, including the requirement that we, you know, gather good evidence that the borrower is solvent. This was—this law was amended in, you know, under—in Dodd Frank, and the idea was, was to make it challenging and put hurdles in place before we made loans—at the time, the thinking was to banks. So now we—now we’re using that same law for, for smaller business borrowers, and, you know, it doesn’t—it’s not a perfect fit. And, and, I would also just say, for many borrowers, they’re in a situation where their business is still relatively shut down, and they won’t be able to service a loan, and so they may need more fiscal support. Having said that, we’re, we’re continuing to work to, to improve Main Street, to make it more broadly available—make it pretty much to any company that needs it and that can service a loan. . I can’t say. I don’t—I don’t know about that. I haven’t heard those reports. You know, again, if you think about it, we, we weren’t—we’re, we’re going to have to go through the banking system to do this. We—we’re not going to have a hundred thousand or a million loan officers working for the Fed and the Treasury. So we’re going to go through the banking system, and the banks—banks like to make good loans. That’s what they do. They’re trained to make good loans. So you should expect that they—and we expect that they will do some underwriting. We also want them to take some risk, obviously, because that was the point of it. And the question is, how do you dial that in? It’s, it’s not an easy thing to do. And, you know, we’re getting some loans made, and we’re hopeful that we’ll, that we’ll clarify this and that credit will continue to flow. . Yes, we—of course, we can’t be—we can’t be really sure we know the answers to those questions. But I would say, the, the likely path is that the—that the expansion will continue. And it’s, as I said, it’s well along, and it’ll move most easily through the parts of the economy—it’ll still take some time, but the parts of the economy that weren’t exactly directly affected, that didn’t involve getting people in large groups together to feed them, to fly them around, to put them in hotels, do entertainment, things like that—those are going to be the places that are—that are very challenging. So there will also be the—you know, the places that are affected that way. And that’s going to be challenging for, for some time. It just is. And we don’t really know how long that will be. It’s—you know, it’s millions of people. As I mentioned, we had 11 million—something like 11 million people in the payroll survey have gone back to work out of 22 million who went—who lost their jobs in March and April. So that’s half of them. So, 11 million— particularly if the pace of, of returning to work slows down, it’s going to leave a large—a large group of people. And it’ll be very meaningful from a macroeconomic standpoint. And our commitment is not to forget those people. As I mentioned, we want—you know, the sense of our forward guidance is that policy will remain, as we’ve said, highly accommodative until the— until the expansion is well along—really, very close to our goals. And even after, if we do lift off, we will keep policy accommodative until we actually have a moderate overshoot of inflation for some time. So those are powerful commitments that we think will, will support the full recovery, including those people, as long as it takes. . Well, no, I wouldn’t—I certainly would not say that we’re out of ammo. Not at all. So, first of all, we, we do have lots of tools. We’ve got the lending tools, we’ve got the balance sheet, and we’ve got further forward guidance—further forward guidance. So we, we—there’s still plenty more that we can do. We do think that our—that our, our rate policy stance is an appropriate one to support the economy. We think it’s powerful. And, as I mentioned, you know, this is the kind of guidance that will provide support for the economy over time, the idea being that policy will remain highly accommodative until the recovery is well along—really, very close to our goals—and then will remain accommodative even after we lift off. So I think that’s, that’s a really strong place for, for rate policy to be. But, again, we have the other margins that we can still use. So, no. Certainly, we’re not out of ammo. . You know, so, of course we monitor financial conditions very carefully. These are—these are not new questions. These were questions that were very much in the air a decade ago and more when, when the Fed first started doing QE. And, I would say, if you look at the long experience of, you know, the 10 year, 8 month expansion, the longest in our recorded history, it included an awful lot of quantitative easing and low rates for 7 years. And, I would say, it was notable for the lack of the emergence of, of some sort of a financial bubble—a housing bubble or some kind of a bubble, the popping of which could threaten the expansion. That didn’t happen. And, frankly, it hasn’t really happened around the world since then. That doesn’t mean that it won’t happen, but—and so, of course, it’s something that we monitor carefully. After the financial crisis, we started a new—a whole division of the Fed to focus on financial stability. We look at it in every—from every perspective. The FOMC gets briefed on a quarterly basis. At the Board here, we talk about it more or less on an ongoing basis, so it is something we monitor. But I don’t know that the—that the connection between asset purchases and, and financial stability is a particularly tight one. So—but again, we won’t be—we won’t be just assuming that. We’ll be checking carefully as we go. And, by the way, the kinds of tools that we would use to address those sorts of things are not really monetary policy. It would be more tools that strengthen the financial system. . So, I mean, I think the overall picture—take a step back from this. The overall picture is clear, and that is that the labor market has been recovering, but that it’s a long way—a long way from maximum employment. I think that’s, that’s the bottom line on it. So, within that, though—take claims in particular. The number of claims, the quantity of claims, and, frankly, the fact that PUA claims are new—the Pandemic Unemployment Assistance claims—that’s a new system that had to be set up. The actual counting of the claims is, is volatile, and, and it’s very difficult to take much signal about the particular level. So, you know, because people were setting those systems up, and when they got them set up, they counted them all at once and things like that. I think, though, what you’ve seen is that the level of—certainly the level of initial claims has declined very sharply from the very high levels of March and April and is now at a lower level—continues either to be flat or gradually decline. It’s worth noting—and that’s good—it’s worth noting that that level is maybe five times the level of what claims were. Claims were around 200,000  now they’re 900,000, in that range, weekly for, for initial claims. So that just tells you, the labor market has improved, but it’s a long, long way from maximum employment, and it will be some time getting back there. I think that’s the best way to think about it. In many parts of the economy there’s just a lot of disruption, and it’s, it’s really hard to say precisely where we are. I’ll give you another example with—you know, we say unemployment’s 8.4 percent. But if you count those who are—who are misidentified as, as employed when they’re actually unemployed and you add back some part of the participation number—so if you were—if you had a job and you were in the labor force in February and you lost it because of the pandemic, some of you are now being reported as out of the labor force. But I—you know, I would—I would more look at those people as unemployed. If you add those back, the level of unemployment’s probably 3 percent higher. On the other hand, by that metric, the, the unemployment rate would have been in the—in the 20s in, in April. So the improvement has been quite substantial under any measurement. But the level is still quite high. . Yes, absolutely. You know, I, I can’t be precise about a particular number, but let me just say, there was a lot to like about 3½ percent unemployment. It’s not a magic number. No one would say that number is the touchstone or that is, you know, maximum employment. I would just say, you asked about 3½ percent. A 3½ percent unemployment rate showed, you know, gains being shared very widely across the income spectrum—in fact, going more to people at the bottom end of the spectrum. It showed labor force participation coming up as—up above many estimates of its trend, as people who’d been out of the labor force were being pulled into a tight job market. There’s a lot to like about a tough—a tight job market, particularly in a world where we didn’t see inflation. So, yes, we’d love to get back to that. I mean, I would say, we would like to get back—rather than to a particular number, we’d like to get back to a strong labor market where wages are moving up, where people can find work, where labor force participation is holding up nicely. That’s what we’d really love to get back to. Now, of course we would—we need inflation to perform in line with, with our framework. But the good news is, we think we can have quite low unemployment without raising troubling inflation. . You know, we do—we are gifted with a, a substantial group of researchers who really cover the waterfront. And we do a significant amount of research on racial disparities in—across multiple variables, including wealth, as you asked about. So we do that. And we also—remember, we have our Division of Consumer and Community Affairs, which is present in communities around the country. And the Reserve Banks all have very active community affairs groups. They’re present in communities around the country. So it wasn’t just the Fed—Fed Listens events. It’s more, just, over a long period of time we, we are in contact with people in those communities to understand their experience of the economy. We serve all Americans, and we know that. And we’re going to use our tools to, to reflect that fact. So the answer is “yes.” We do quite a bit of research, and I suppose we could do more, but we really do a lot. And we contribute to those fields and those assessments of, of the state of the economy. And we do that not just because it’s interesting and important, but because it’s important for the economy and important for our mandate. We are assigned “maximum employment.” Now, what does that mean? As I mentioned earlier, it doesn’t mean a particular headline unemployment number. What it means is maximum employment. So, you know, we look at—look at that in many, many different variables, and we ask ourselves whether those variables are—those labor market conditions are consistent with our assessments of what would constitute maximum employment. And that would include all of the things that we’re talking about. . I wouldn’t—I don’t want to comment particularly on, on the two dissenters, but they, they consent—they dissented from, of course, different perspectives, and, and that should be clear. That’s their—they’re not they’re sort of on, on two sides of the, of the discussion. But I would say this: I am blessed —with having a Committee of highly thoughtful people who bring diverse life experiences and diverse careers, and, of course, diverse views to our work. And I wouldn’t have it any other way. I wouldn’t. So, so I would just say, the right—in our discussions the last couple of days, the whole Committee, everybody on the Committee is very supportive of the Statement on Longer Run Goals and Monetary Policy Strategy and what’s in there—very, very broad support, unanimous support for that. Everyone sees the, the changes in the underlying economy and sees, in their own way, the need to address those—and including the changes we made to the employment mandate and to inflation so that we’re now at flexible average inflation targeting. Of course, there would be—this is—you know, we’re the first major central bank to adopt this framework. There’s no cookbook, and we—you know, this is the first guidance under our new framework. So, of course there would be a wide range of views, and you would expect that. And it’s actually a healthy thing. So I welcome that discussion. I would also say this: You know, this is all about credibility, and we understand perfectly that we have to earn credibility. This, this facility—this, this framework has to—we have to support it with our actions. And I think today is a very good first step in doing that. It is strong, powerful guidance. It is—it ties in very nicely with the Statement of [on] Longer Run Goals and Monetary Policy Strategy. We had quite a robust discussion, and there are, there are different ideas on how to do this, but I—that’s just, that’s just the way it is when you have a diverse group of highly thoughtful and effective people. And so I’m pleased with where it came out. . So thank you for that question. You know, we’ve actually spent quite a bit of time on this as Secretary Mnuchin, I think, mentioned the other day. And I’ll say just a couple things. First, you know, our facilities are essentially always—they have to be, under the law—broad based and not so much targeting any single sector. Also, it’s important to remember that CRE, commercial real estate, benefits from several of our existing facilities. So the TALF takes commercial mortgage backed securities and SBA commercial real estate deals. And the New York Fed purchases agency CMBSs directly. In addition, I would say, Main Street helps businesses pay their rent, you know. So we’re, we’re helping real estate, you know, in a number of other ways—commercial real estate. Also, CMBS issuance has resumed. Spreads have tightened on CMBS. There are a couple of issues. One is just that commercial properties with CMBS loans often have covenants—uniformly, I think, have covenants that forbid them to take on more debt. So you have a situation, and you have a situation where, where you—without a legal change or some kind of an innovation that defies discovery so far, you’re—you have a hard time providing mass relief with regard to real estate that’s in, in commercial mortgage backed securities. So we’re still working on it. We’re still looking. I would say, it may be that further support for commercial real estate will require further action for Congress—from Congress. . That’s a very, very important question, and I actually spoke about that in my Jackson Hole remarks a couple weeks ago. It’s not intuitive to people. It is intuitive that, that high inflation is a bad thing. It’s less intuitive that inflation can be too low. And the way I would explain it is, is that inflation that’s too low will mean that interest rates are lower. There’s an expectation of future inflation that’s built into every interest rate, right? And to the extent inflation gets lower and lower and lower, interest rates get lower and lower. And then the Fed will have less room to cut rates to support the economy. And this isn’t some idle, you know, academic theory. This is what’s happening all over the world. If you, if you look at many, many large jurisdictions around the world, you are seeing that phenomenon. So we want inflation to be—we want it to be 2 percent, and we want it to average 2 percent. So if inflation averages 2 percent, the public will expect that, and that’ll be what’s built into interest rates. And that’s just—that’s all we want. So we’re not looking to have high inflation. We just want inflation to average 2 percent. And that means that, you know, in a downturn, these days, what happens is, inflation, as has happened now—it moves down well below 2 percent. And that means that we’ve said for, for—we would like to see and we will conduct policies so that inflation moves, for some time, moderately above 2 percent. So it won’t be—these won’t be large overshoots, and they won’t be permanent but to help anchor inflation expectations at 2 percent. So, yes, it’s, it’s a challenging concept for a lot of people. But, nonetheless, the economic importance of it is, is large. And, you know, those are the people we’re serving, and, you know, we serve them best if we can actually achieve average 2 percent inflation, we believe. And that’s why we changed our framework. . Thanks very much.

****FOMCpresconf20201105

. Good afternoon. At the Federal Reserve, we are strongly committed to achieving the monetary policy goals that Congress has given us—maximum employment and price stability. Since the beginning of the pandemic, we have taken forceful actions to provide relief and stability, to ensure that the recovery will be as strong as possible, and to limit lasting damage to the economy. Today my colleagues on the Federal Open Market Committee and I reaffirmed our commitment to support the economy in this challenging time. Economic activity has continued to recover from its depressed second quarter level. The reopening of the economy led to a rapid rebound in activity, and real GDP rose at an annual rate of 33 percent in the third quarter. In recent months, however, the pace of improvement has moderated. Household spending on goods, especially durable goods, has been strong and has moved above its pre pandemic level. In contrast, spending on services remains low, largely due to ongoing weakness in sectors that typically require people to gather closely, including travel and hospitality. The overall rebound in household spending owes, in part, to federal stimulus payments and expanded unemployment benefits, which provided essential support to many families and individuals. The housing sector has fully recovered from the downturn, supported in part by low mortgage interest rates. Business investment has also picked up. Even so, overall economic activity remains well below its level before the pandemic, and the path ahead remains highly uncertain. In the labor market, roughly half of the 22 million jobs that were lost in March and April have been regained, as many people were able to return to work. As with overall economic activity, the pace of improvement in the labor market has moderated. The unemployment rate declined over the past five months but remained elevated at 7.9 percent as of September. Although we welcome this progress, we will not lose sight of the millions of Americans who remain out of work. The economic downturn has not fallen equally on all Americans, and those least able to shoulder the burden have been hardest hit. In particular, the high level of joblessness has been especially severe for lower wage workers in the services sector, for women, and for African Americans and Hispanics. The economic dislocation has upended many lives and created great uncertainty about the future. The pandemic has also left a significant imprint on inflation. Following large declines in the spring, consumer prices picked up over the summer, in part reflecting a rise in durable goods prices. However, for those sectors that have been most affected by the pandemic, prices remain particularly soft. Overall, on a 12 month basis, inflation remains below our 2 percent longer run objective. As we have emphasized throughout the pandemic, the outlook for the economy is extraordinarily uncertain and will depend in large part on the success of efforts to keep the virus in check. The recent rise in new COVID 19 cases, both here in the United States and abroad, is particularly concerning. All of us have a role to play in our nation’s response to the pandemic. Following the advice of public health professionals to keep appropriate social distances and to wear masks in public will help get the economy back to full strength. A full economic recovery is unlikely until people are confident that it’s safe to reengage in a broad range of activities. The Federal Reserve’s response to this crisis has been guided by our mandate to promote maximum employment and stable prices for the American people, along with our responsibilities to promote the stability of the financial system. As noted in our Statement on Longer Run Goals and Monetary Policy Strategy, we view maximum employment as a “broad based and inclusive goal.” Our ability to achieve maximum employment in the years ahead depends importantly on having longer term inflation expectations well anchored at 2 percent. As we said in September and again today, with inflation running persistently below 2 percent, we will aim to achieve inflation moderately above 2 percent for some time so that inflation averages 2 percent over time and longer term inflation expectations remain well anchored at 2 percent. We expect to maintain an accommodative stance of monetary policy until these employment and inflation outcomes are achieved. With regard to interest rates, we continue to expect that it will be appropriate to maintain the current 0 to ¼ percent target range for the federal funds rate until labor market conditions have reached levels consistent with the Committee’s assessments of maximum employment and inflation has risen to 2 percent and is on track to moderately exceed 2 percent for some time. In addition, over coming months we will continue to increase our holdings of Treasury securities and agency mortgage backed securities at least at the current pace. These asset purchases are intended to sustain smooth market functioning and help foster accommodative financial conditions, thereby supporting the flow of credit to households and businesses. At this meeting, my colleagues and I discussed our asset purchases and the role they are playing in supporting the recovery. At the current pace, our holdings of securities are rising at a substantial rate of $120 billion per month—$80 billion per month of Treasuries and $40 billion per month of agency MBS. We believe these purchases, along with the very large purchases made to preserve financial stability in the depths of the crisis, have materially eased financial conditions and are providing substantial support to the economy. Looking ahead, we will continue to monitor developments and assess how our ongoing asset purchases can best support our maximum  employment and price stability objectives as well as market functioning and financial stability. The Federal Reserve has also been taking broad and forceful actions to more directly support the flow of credit in the economy for households, for businesses large and small, and for state and local governments. Preserving the flow of credit is essential for mitigating damage to the economy and promoting a robust recovery. Many of our programs rely on emergency lending powers that require the support of the Treasury Department and are available only in very unusual circumstances, such as those we find ourselves in today. These programs serve as a backstop to key credit markets and have helped to restore the flow of credit from private lenders through normal channels. We have deployed these lending powers to an unprecedented extent, enabled in large part by financial backing and support from Congress and the Treasury. When the time comes, after the crisis has passed, we will put these emergency tools back in the toolbox. As I have emphasized before, these are lending powers, not spending powers. The Fed cannot grant money to particular beneficiaries. We can only create programs or facilities with broad based eligibility to make loans to solvent entities with the expectation that the loans will be repaid. Many borrowers are benefiting from these programs, as is the overall economy. But for many others, getting a loan that may be difficult to repay may not be the answer. In these cases, direct fiscal support may be needed. Elected officials have the power to tax and spend and to make decisions about where we, as a society, should direct our collective resources. The fiscal policy actions that have been taken thus far have made a critical difference to families, businesses, and communities across the country. Even so, the current economic downturn is the most severe in our lifetimes. It will take a while to get back to the levels of economic activity and employment that prevailed at the beginning of this year, and it may take continued support from both monetary and fiscal policy to achieve that. I’d like to mention a couple of changes that we plan on making to our Summary of Economic Projections beginning in December. First, we will release the entire package of SEP materials at the same time that the FOMC statement comes out. Previously, some of these materials were released three weeks after the meeting as part of the minutes. This step will make more information available at the time of our policy announcements, including the distributions of forecasts and how participants judge the uncertainty and risks that attend their projections. Second, we will add two new graphs that show how the balance of participants’ assessments of uncertainty and risks have evolved over time. These changes to the SEP will provide a timely perspective on the risks and uncertainties that surround the modal or baseline projections, thereby highlighting some of the risk management considerations that are relevant for monetary policy. To conclude, we understand that our actions affect communities, families, and businesses across the country. Everything we do is in service to our public mission. We are committed to using our full range of tools to support the economy and to help assure that the recovery from this difficult period will be as robust as possible. Thank you. I look forward to your questions. . Sure. So, of course. Let’s start with February. In February, we had an economy that was performing well. Then the pandemic hit, and we had a record decline in activity in March and April, and then we had a record bounceback in May and June. And so as I think would have been expected and was expected, the pace of improvement from May and June has now moderated, so it’s not unexpected. And I think if you look at just about anything, you know, for example, the payroll readings, the payroll job gains in May and June were just outsized. And they’re certainly still very large, but they’ve—but the pace of improvement has moderated. That’s the case for, for all different measures in the labor force—in the labor market, rather. Another would be claims. Just about all the data were—showed a big bounceback. But then, as you would expect, when, when you sort of had people—a lot of people go back to work at once, the pace will moderate. Same thing with economic activity. Most forecasts call for, you know, still a significant growth in the fourth quarter but not at the 33 percent annualized pace that we had in the third quarter. So, in a sense, that would be—that would be as expected. We have been concerned that the downside risks, though, are, are prevalent now, which are—which are really the risk of the further spread of the disease and also the risk that, that households will run through the savings they’ve managed to accumulate on their balance sheet and that that could weigh on activity. But what we see up to the present, really, is, continued growth, continued expansion, but at, at a gradually moderating pace. . So it is—obviously, it’s for Congress to decide the timing, size, and components of further fiscal support for the economy, and I will say that the support provided by the CARES Act was absolutely essential in supporting the recovery that we’ve seen so far, which has generally exceeded expectations. And I do think it’s likely that further support is likely to be needed for monetary policy and fiscal policy. I just mentioned the two risks that I think we, we face, and those would be well addressed through more fiscal policy. One is the further spread of the virus, and the other is the lapsing of the CARES Act benefits and the savings on people’s balance sheets that will dwindle. But I, you know, I think it’s appropriate for us not to try to prescribe for Congress exactly what they should do or what the timing of it should be or what the size of it should be and leave it at that. . So on your first question, you know, we’ll take into account all external factors and, and do what we think we need to do with the tools that we have to pursue our goals. That’s what we will do. And I’ve said it on a couple of occasions that that will go better and move more quickly if we have a broad set of policies from across the government. And we’ve said this in the very beginning: It’s really, first and foremost, health care policy, getting the—getting the spread of the virus under control and working on therapeutics and vaccines and that kind of thing, getting—so that—those are absolutely critical to the economy. Now, those are important, as well as health policies. They’re, they’re going to be critical to the economy. Fiscal policy can do what we can’t, which is to replace lost incomes for people who are out of work through no fault of their own. And then we—what we can do is, we can obviously support financial stability through our lending programs, and, and we can support demand through, through interest rates and asset purchases and that sort of thing. So we’re, we’re going to take the economy as it comes, including all external factors. So I think all of us lived through the experience of the—of the years after the Global Financial Crisis. And for a number of years there, in the middle of the recovery, fiscal policy was pretty tight. And. and I think I just would say that I think we’ll have a stronger recovery if we can just get at least some more fiscal support when it’s appropriate, you know, when it’s appropriate and in the size Congress thinks is appropriate. I do think that that will likely—and, by the way, you see, you know, a lot of discussion on both sides of the aisle, on both sides of the Hill that suggests generally that there will be something. . So, on the first—the first question, it’s—our asset purchases are serving both purchases, both—sorry, both purposes: financial market function and support for economic activity. So—and that’s really been true—I think in the very beginning of the crisis, the main focus was, obviously, financial, financial market function, particularly in, in, you know, some of the major markets. But after that period, we’ve, we’ve understood all along that our purchases are also supporting economic activity, and that’s important. And that need hasn’t dwindled at all. So, so we haven’t looked at reducing purchases. So in terms of what they can do, first I would just say, the purchases that we have in place are providing strong support to economic activity still. And, by the way, they’re sustaining the gains we’ve made in financial stability. You know, we don’t—we don’t take anything for granted. We, we don’t expect that things will deteriorate. But, nonetheless, we have a habit of keeping things in place for a while. So we’re not taking our gains in financial market function for granted, although, admittedly, they’ve been very large. So the asset purchases are just another very important piece of the accommodative policy stance that we have. And, you know, as you know, these—we’re buying $120 billion a month. That’s $1.44 trillion, if I remember my times tables. And it’s just providing a lot of support for, for economic activity and, by the way, removing just about the same amount of duration risk from private hands as QE3 did. So this is a big program, and it’s doing a lot of good. And we also, today, you know, we had a full discussion of the options around quantitative ease—not quantitative easing, the asset purchase program, and, you know, we understand the, the ways in which we can adjust the parameters of it to deliver more accommodation if it turns out to be appropriate. Right now, we think that this very large, effective program is delivering about the right amount of accommodation and support for the markets, and so it continues. . Thank you. So you did—you laid out nicely the, the risks of damage to the supply side of the economy, or “scarring,” as you put it. And we’ve been talking about those since the very beginning of the pandemic. The risk is that, for example, people are out of the labor force for an extended period of time. They lose their attachment to the labor force, and it’s harder to get back. Your skills atrophy. It’s harder to get back in. And the record is, if you don’t get back in very fairly quickly, it can be harder to get back in. And that holds down the whole economy. And, by the way, it also—it places enormous burdens on individuals who may have this happen to them at an important stage in their career. So it’s, it’s, it’s important. And, you know—so that is one of the reasons why our response was so strong and so urgent at the beginning and why we called this, this set of risks out. I don’t know how we could be much more vocal about it than we have been. Fortunately, for—you know, the economic recovery has exceeded, certainly, the downside cases that we were very concerned about and even, even exceeded—sort of exceeded the baseline expectations. Now, that’s so far. We are a long way from our goals. And, you know, we’re, we’re sort of halfway there on the labor market recovery at best. And, and there are parts of the economy where it’s going to be hard until there’s a vaccine—you know, the parts of the economy. So, you know, that’s the supply side damage. That’s sort of the third thing that we talk about. The first, at the beginning, it was to provide relief and comfort. The second—then the second part was to provide support when—to the expansion when it came. And the third was to avoid longer run damage to the economy, and that’s, that’s all of these things. I think we have been vocal. You know, we’ll, we’ll try to continue to do that. And, and those are—that’s again—that goes to keeping this episode as short as it can be and avoiding unnecessary business bankruptcies, unnecessary household bankruptcies, and unnecessary long  term stays of unemployment or supporting people through them so that they can maintain their financial footing and their lives and be able to go back to work in a productive way. It’s, it’s very important that—you know, there is a real threat here of those things, and, and, you know, we’re trying to do everything we can to minimize that threat. . Yes, thanks. So, first, let me say, we do think that the facilities have, have generally served their purposes well, particularly in supporting the flow of credit, particularly acting as backstops to private markets. So, overall, we think that the, the programs have, have gone well. In terms of the extension, we are, we are just now turning to that question. You know, we’ve had a lot of things to work our way through. Right now we’re just in the process of turning to that question and, of course, not made any decisions. And in terms of the process, this is a decision that, of course, we have to make and will make jointly with the Treasury Department. . Okay, thanks. So two questions. First, I, I take the sense of your first question to be, is monetary policy out of power or out of ammo? And the answer to that would be “no,” I don’t think that. I think—I think that we are strongly committed to using these powerful tools that we have to support the economy during this difficult time for as long as needed, and no one should have any doubt about that. And we do not doubt the power of the things that we’ve already done or the things that we may, may do in the future. I do think there’s more that can be done. And I also think, if you look at the stock of assets that we’ve bought, if you look at the facilities and, and the way we’ve been able to keep accommodative financial— financial conditions accommodative, I think we’ve been able to do a lot of things that are providing very strong support for the economy. And we’re going to—we’re going to keep at that. I’ve said—we’ve said from the very beginning, though, that this is particular—that the particular situation we find ourselves in is one where there is a sudden loss of income on, on the part of millions and tens of millions of people. It’s not so much a typical recession where demand weakens, the Fed cuts interest rates, interest rates stimulate demand, and the economy recovers. It’s a sudden shock where tens of millions of people are out of work. And the fiscal response was, was frankly, I think, very good and very robust in the United States. And it’s certainly one of the main reasons why the recovery has been as good as it’s been so far. So I do think fiscal policy is absolutely essential here. You know, stimulating aggregate demand is one thing, but where there’s a part of the economy that kind of will be resistant to that, you also need fiscal policy. And, of course, you need health care policy too. I didn’t see Madame Lagarde’s comments this morning, but I, I took the sense of that question to be the spread of the disease in Europe, and what do we think about that? Yes. So, as I mentioned in my—in my opening remarks, it’s a concern. We have a widespread spike in cases across the country, more in some regions than others. And even if we don’t have—and I don’t expect that we would—sort of government imposed restrictions, it does seem likely, though, that people who have maybe begun to engage in activities that they had in flying, staying in a hotel, going to restaurants, going to bars, and, and things like that, that they may pull back in a situation where suddenly the cases are everywhere in your city, your state, your community. So I do think that that’s a risk that we have as we go into the fall now and, and the cases spike. That, that could weigh on economic activity. One would expect that it would. We thought the same thing, in fairness, about the wave we had this summer in the South and the West. And the economy, you know, seemed to move right through that. This one seems to be larger and more widespread. In any case, it’s a risk, is what I would characterize it—I would characterize it as a risk, as I did in my—in my comments. . So let me—let me say, in the first instance, our, our main focus is on doing our job, and that is really what we’re, we’re focused on is using the tools that Congress has given us and the assignment they’ve given us. And I think we’re, we’re—that is the thing that we think about night and day. I just know from, from the experience of the last cycle, it helps to have the whole government working on these things, and this one is particularly that way. And I, I don’t—I think—you know, I, I don’t want to say whether I feel like I’m being heard or not. But, sure, I think there are plenty of people on Capitol Hill who, on both sides of the aisle, on both sides of the Hill, who see a need for further fiscal action and understand perfectly why that might be the case. . So I don’t really have a specific hypothetical I would—I would put to you. I would just say that we, we understand that there are a number of parameters that we have where we can shift the composition, the duration, you know, the size, the life, life cycle of the program. All of those things are, are available to us as ways to deliver addition—you know, more accommodation if we think that’s appropriate. Right now, we, we like the amount of accommodation the program is, is delivering. And it will just depend on the—on the facts and circumstances. We may reach a view at some point that we need to do more on that front. Today’s meeting was about analyzing the—one of the things it was about was about analyzing the various ways and having a, you know, good discussion about how to think about those, those various parameters, which I, I thought was quite a useful discussion. . Yes. So I, I do think that the public, public will expect and has every right to expect that we—that in our oversight of the financial system, we will account for all material risks and try to protect the economy and the public from those risks. Climate change is, is one of those risks. It’s a relatively—the science and art of incorporating climate change into our thinking about financial regulation is relatively new, as you know. And we are, you know, very actively, in the early stages of this, getting up to speed, working with our central bank colleagues and other colleagues around the world to try to think about how this can be part of our framework. And we’re watching what other—what other countries are doing. We’re active participants, as you know, in the CG—no, the greening the financial system. And, you know, we haven’t, we hadn’t actually formally joined, but we’re there. We’re in the working groups, and we’re doing all of that. So we’re very much working with and monitoring the things other central banks are doing. You hear—you know, there’s lots of research going on at the various Reserve Banks and here at the Board in trying to understand this. These tend to be longer term risks. But, of course, the longer term does arrive over time. And, you know, we take it as our obligation to—you know, to understand these risks and incorporate them into our— into the way we supervise and, and think about the, the overall financial system and the economy. . So, on your first question, we, we really are just turning to this issue now, and we have not made any decisions. We, we are just getting started on it, and, and it’s a decision that we’ll make jointly with the Treasury Department. And that’s, that’s really all I can say today. That’s all I have for you on that today. In terms of the tail risks, I mean, I think clearly the tail risks that we were worried about have, have subsided. And, you know, we were worried about very negative potential outcomes. And that—you know, that’s, that’s—what is to be expected of us is, is to think about how things can go wrong as well as the way things that can go right. But we, we have to—we do make policy from a risk management standpoint. We don’t just look at the most likely case. We, we ask, “How do you make policy in light of the risks?” and often it’s downside risks in a situation like this. I would not say that anybody’s feeling comfortable about this, though. You know, we’ve gotten through the first five, six months of the—of the expansion better than expected, but we do see in Europe—look what’s happening in Europe, look what’s happening here—another spike in cases as the cold weather arrives and people are inside more. So I think we have to be humble about where we are relative to this—to this disease. It hasn’t gone away. Clearly, you know, therapeutics are advancing, research on vaccines are advancing, death rates are way down, hospitalization rates are, are lower now, but—so we’re learning. But, I mean, we, we are so— we’re very far from saying that we think we’ve got this and eliminated the tail risks. But I think, clearly, the tail risks have, have diminished since—at least our perception of them has diminished since earlier in the year. . So let me say why it’s such an important—you know, in a world where so many payments are made digitally and all that, coins and currency are very important for the relatively low income people. And so it’s a really incredibly important part of the payment system, and we do pay a lot of attention to it. And I actually just—I just caught up this morning with the—with the person who heads that operation here who, who says that, yes, things have really gotten significantly better on the coin front. So we worked very hard to increase the supply of coins and, even more than that, the distribution of coins around the System and are happy to say that that situation is well on the way to normalizing itself. So very pleased to report that. . Thanks. So I’m very reluctant, as you will imagine, to comment on the election directly, indirectly, at all, other than just to say that it’s a good time to take a step back and let the institutions of our democracy do their jobs. So, at the Fed here, we will, as always, continue to do our jobs. Every day we’ll continue to serve the American people using our tools to support the economy during this difficult time. You know, the—you ask if we had discussions. I would say, you know, the meeting we just finished, for example, what we do is we talk about the economy and markets, domestically and around the world. We hear reports on how households and businesses are doing. We talk about risks to the outlook. We talk about what the right policy response might be. And the election comes up in some—you know, it comes up now and again, but it is not at all a central focus of the meeting. Not at all. So I, I’ll just leave it at that. Again, very reluctant to get into anything more than that. Thanks. . Sure. So, we have had very little demand below $1 million in loans. And part of that just is that the fee structure is what it is, and that’s the compensation that the banks get. And there’s a certain amount of work that they have to do to get—to get into the loan program and do—and to document the thing, the loans that they make because these are loans that, you know, go on their balance sheet. They keep 5 percent, so they actually have to underwrite the credit. And we’re relying on them, to some extent, for, for doing that. And so we were reluctant. We moved the minimum down to $250,000, and we were reluctant to go below that. But we heard, over and over again, that it would be great if we could reduce it to $100,000. So—and, you know, we’ve been saying we’d have to redesign the program. And I, I got the question in a—in an oversight hearing a month or so ago with the Secretary and said that. And I went back to the office and thought, you know, okay, so what would that look like if we were to redesign the program in a way—what’s the least thing we could do to redesign the program so that we could move to a lower level? And it—basically, we concluded we could just change the fee structure to create incentives for that, so we did that. We try to be responsive. We want, you know, qualifying businesses to be able to borrow. And we’ll see how much demand will come. You know, with, with these programs, why did it—why didn’t we do it right away? We tend to—it’s—there’s more work than one might—certainly than I imagined in setting up one of these facilities. And you, you just try to get it out there and get it working and not try to do everything before you start it because you’ll never start it if you do that. Then you get it started, and you make changes. And we’ve been willing to make changes. That’s the most recent set of ones that we’ve done. And, again, we hope—we hope that it will help some companies, and I guess we’ll find out. . So when I say we’re not out of ammo, I’m looking at, you know, a couple of our tools, mainly. As I mentioned, the asset purchase program—there’s a number of dimensions in which we can adjust that if we deem it to be appropriate. Right now, we like the job it’s doing. We could, you know, if, if the facilities are extended, we could certainly look at new facilities. If—you know, if things deteriorate, that would be the case where you’d want to maybe continue the facilities and, and, and maybe change them and maybe have new ones. Who knows? But, certainly, the facilities have been doing a lot of work and been very successful, I think, overall in accomplishing that job. So I do think there, there are things that we can do. But, remember, we’ve always said this will take a whole of government approach, including health care policy and fiscal policy too. So it really is, if you—if you want to get the economy back as quickly as possible to where we want it to be, then, then really it should be all of government working together. . Yes. There’s a bunch of programs. I would say that the, you know, the corporate—the larger corporate market based lending program has been very successful without making a single loan—I think, unambiguously, has been a big success. I think the success—I think the state and local government program has also restored market function so that—whereas, you know, there were the, the sort of individual investors who wind up funding loans in the muni market through. through mutual funds, they, they had withdrawn a lot of money, and, and that—we’ve had many weeks of consecutive, I believe, of, of inflows there, and you’re largely back to a normal functioning market. I think that’s also been a success. I think the other—certainly the, the funding market programs have been a big success. The—Main Street is just—is just a bigger challenge than all of them. Reaching out to small and medium sized businesses through the banking system, which we had to do, is, is quite challenging. I do think, you know, the grant programs, the PPP, were, were a great way to reach smaller companies. You know, what you hear out there is that demand—you talk to banks, and they’ll say demand for loans is very, very low right now. Companies are not borrowing. And, and the reason is that, you know, activity’s at a relatively low level. They don’t want to run up their debt. You know, so I—we put, we put an awful lot into Main Street, and it is very challenging to reach a lot of those companies. But I—you know, I think we, we are reaching many of them now, and, and I hope that the new changes will help us reach more. . You know, so I’m going to take your question literally. And so if the idea is money financed fiscal policy, that’s not something that we would consider. So that— what I mean by that is, is really, you know, the, the central bank is really funding fiscal activities of the government fairly directly. No, that’s not something we do. We have different jobs. That separation between those jobs is absolutely critical in our system of government. The—you know, the job of taxation and spending goes to people who have stood for election and been elected, and that’s the way it should be. There—they have to be responsible to the electorate. We have a specific, you know, job to do with, with a specific set of tools to support maximum employment, stable prices, financial stability, help the payment system, supervise banks—all the things we’re assigned to do. But we, we, we’re not going to get into financing the government and, and—by the way, when we buy government bonds, we don’t—it doesn’t actually, as you probably know, doesn’t change the amount of government debt outstanding. We issue a reserve to, to purchase a Treasury security, and that’s just another form—on the consolidated balance sheet of the federal government, that’s just another obligation. You change the—you change the, you know, the nature of the obligation, but not the total quantity of debt that the government has when you do these asset purchase programs. So I don’t know exactly what you’re referring to. But, you know, to—again, to take your question literally about financing fiscal activity, it’s really not something that we think the central bank should do and, and not something we’re looking at. . Well, we’re doing that with the Municipal Liquidity Facility now, so we’re, we’re buying, you know, with, with our own funds and with the CARES Act funds that, that we’ve gotten through Congress and the Treasury. We’re buying municipal securities of up to three years. So we’re doing that now as part of an emergency facility under section 13(3), you know, which has to meet the emergency requirements of exigent circumstances and which is all clearly laid out in the law. So we’re, we’re actually doing that now. But I, I see—what that is, from our standpoint, is a rare thing that we do under section 13(3) when regular intermediation in the capital markets or in the banking system has broken down. It’s no longer working. So we step in under 13(3), and we provide liquidity. What turns out to happen is, we announce a program, and the market starts working. So we only actually have to do a backstop. The amount of financing that’s happened in the municipal markets this year is much higher than it was the prior year, and, and we didn’t do it. We did—we’ve done a very small number of, of loans. But just the fact that we’re there as a backstop seems to—seems to get the private parties to get back together and, and get the market working again. So that’s what 13(3) is for. We’re not—that shouldn’t be a permanent thing where we’re just another federal financing agency that’s available to direct credit to—you know, to very worthy borrowers. That would be more along the lines of a GSE. That’s not what we do. We’re there to provide emergency liquidity when intermediation has broken down and then to pull back on that when— you know, when—as the markets normalize, we pull back and we put those tools away, as we did after the Global Financial Crisis and as we will here when the time comes. . Thank you.

****FOMCpresconf20201216

. Good afternoon. At the Federal Reserve, we are strongly committed to achieving the monetary policy goals that Congress has given us—maximum employment and price stability. Since the beginning of the pandemic, we have taken forceful actions to provide relief and stability, to ensure that the recovery will be as strong as possible, and to limit lasting damage to the economy. Today my colleagues on the FOMC and I reaffirmed our strong forward guidance for interest rates and also provided additional guidance for our asset purchases. Together, these measures will ensure that monetary policy will continue to deliver powerful support to the economy until the recovery is complete. Economic activity has continued to recover from its depressed second quarter level. The substantial reopening of the economy led to a rapid rebound in activity, and real GDP rose at an annual rate of 33 percent in the third quarter. In recent months, however, the pace of improvement has moderated. Household spending on goods, especially durable goods, has been strong and has moved above its pre pandemic level. In contrast, spending on services remains low, especially in sectors that typically require people to gather closely, including travel and hospitality. The overall rebound in household spending owes in part to federal stimulus payments and expanded unemployment benefits, which provided essential support to many families and individuals. The housing sector has fully recovered from the downturn, supported in part by low mortgage interest rates. Business investment has also picked up. The recovery has progressed more quickly than generally expected, and forecasts from FOMC participants for economic growth this year have been revised up since our September Summary of Economic Projections. Even so, overall economic activity remains well below its level before the pandemic, and the path ahead remains highly uncertain. In the labor market, more than half of the 22 million jobs that were lost in March and April have been regained, as many people were able to return to work. As with overall economic activity, the pace of improvement in the labor market has moderated. Job growth slowed to 245,000 in November, and while the unemployment rate has continued to decline, it remains elevated at 6.7 percent. Participation in the labor market remains notably below pre pandemic levels. Although there has been much progress in the labor market since the spring, we will not lose sight of the millions of Americans who remain out of work. Looking ahead, FOMC participants project the unemployment rate to continue to decline  the median projection is 5 percent at the end of next year and moves below 4 percent by 2023. The economic downturn has not fallen equally on all Americans, and those least able to shoulder the burden have been the hardest hit. In particular, the high level of joblessness has been especially severe for lower wage workers in the service sector and for African Americans and Hispanics. The economic dislocation has upended many lives and created great uncertainty about the future. The pandemic has also left a significant imprint on inflation. Following large declines in the spring, consumer prices picked up over the summer but have leveled out more recently. For those sectors that have been most adversely affected by the pandemic, prices remain particularly soft. Overall, on a 12 month basis, inflation remains below our 2 percent longer run objective. The median inflation projection from FOMC participants rises from 1.2 percent this year to 1.8 percent next year and reaches 2 percent in 2023. As we have emphasized throughout the pandemic, the outlook for the economy is extraordinarily uncertain and will depend in large part on the course of the virus. Recent news on vaccines has been very positive. However, significant challenges and uncertainties remain with regard to the timing, production, and distribution of vaccines as well as their efficacy across different groups. It remains difficult to assess the timing and scope of the economic implications of these developments. The ongoing surge in new COVID 19 cases, both here in the United States and abroad, is particularly concerning, and the next few months are likely to be very challenging. All of us have a role to play in our nation’s response to the pandemic. Following the advice of public health professionals to keep appropriate social distances and to wear masks in public will help get the economy back to full strength. A full economic recovery is unlikely until people are confident that it is safe to engage—reengage in a broad range of activities. As we previously announced, we are now releasing the entire package of our SEP materials at the same time as our FOMC statement. Included in these materials are two new exhibits that show how the balance of participants’ assessments of uncertainty and risks have evolved over time. Since the onset of the pandemic, nearly all participants continue to judge the level of uncertainty about the economic outlook as elevated. In terms of risks to the outlook, fewer participants see the balance of risks as weighted to the downside than in September. While a little more than half of participants now judge risks to be broadly balanced for economic activity, a similar number continue to see risks weighted to the downside for inflation. The Fed’s response to this crisis has been guided by our mandate to promote maximum employment and stable prices for the American people, along with our responsibilities to promote the stability of the financial system. As noted in our Statement on Longer Run Goals and Monetary Policy Strategy, we view maximum employment as a broad based and inclusive goal. Our ability to achieve maximum employment in the years ahead depends importantly on having longer term inflation expectations well anchored at 2 percent. As we reiterated in today’s statement, with inflation running persistently below 2 percent, we will aim to achieve inflation moderately above 2 percent for some time so that inflation averages 2 percent over time and longer term inflation expectations remain well anchored at 2 percent. We expect to maintain an accommodative stance of monetary policy until these employment and inflation outcomes are achieved. With regard to interest rates, we continue to expect it will be appropriate to maintain the current 0 to ¼ percent target range for the federal funds rate until labor market conditions have reached levels consistent with the Committee’s assessment of maximum employment and inflation has risen to 2 percent and is on track to moderately exceed 2 percent for some time. In addition, as we noted in today’s policy statement, we will continue to increase our holdings of Treasury securities by at least $80 billion per month and of agency mortgage backed securities by at least $40 billion per month until substantial further progress has been made toward our maximum employment and price stability goals. We believe the increase in our balance sheet this year has materially eased financial conditions and is providing substantial support to the economy. Combined with our forward guidance for the federal funds rate, our enhanced balance sheet guidance will ensure that the stance of monetary policy remains highly accommodative as the recovery progresses. Our guidance is outcome based and is tied to progress toward reaching our employment and inflation goals. Thus, if progress toward our goals were to slow, the guidance would convey our intention to increase policy accommodation through a lower expected path of the federal funds rate and a higher expected path of the balance sheet. Overall, our interest rate and balance sheet tools are providing powerful support to the economy and will continue to do so. The Federal Reserve has also been taking broad and forceful actions to more directly support the flow of credit in the economy for households, for businesses large and small, and for state and local governments. Preserving the flow of credit is essential for mitigating damage to the economy and promoting a robust recovery. Many of our programs rely on emergency lending powers that require the support of the Treasury Department and are available only in very unusual circumstances, such as those we find ourselves in today. These programs serve as a backstop to key credit markets and have helped to restore the flow of credit from private lenders through normal channels. We have deployed these lending powers to an unprecedented extent, enabled in large part by financial backing and support from Congress and the Treasury. Although funds from the CARES Act will not be available to support new loans or new purchases after—of assets after December 31, the Treasury could authorize support for emerging lending facilities, if needed, through the Exchange Stabilization Fund. When the time comes, after the crisis has passed, we will put these emergency tools back in the box. As I have emphasized before, these are lending powers, not spending powers. The Fed cannot grant money to particular beneficiaries. We can only create programs or facilities with broad based eligibility to make loans to solvent entities with the expectation that the loans will be repaid. Many borrowers are benefiting from these programs, as is the overall economy. But for many others, getting a loan that may be difficult to repay may not be the answer. In these cases, direct fiscal support may be needed. Elected officials have the power to tax and spend and to make decisions about where we, as a society, should direct our collective resources. The fiscal policy actions that have been taken thus far have made a critical difference to families, businesses, and communities across the country. Even so, the current economic downturn is the most severe of our lifetimes. It will take a while to get back to the levels of economic activity and employment that prevailed at the beginning of this year, and it may take continued support from both monetary and fiscal policy to achieve that. To conclude, we understand that our actions affect communities, families, and businesses across the country. Everything we do is in service to our public mission. We are committed to using our full range of tools to support the economy and to help assure that the recovery from this difficult period will be as robust as possible. Thank you. I look forward to your questions. . Yes. Well, so we’re not—we’re not going to be identifying specific—associating that test with, with specific numbers at this point. So, really, the question is, what do we mean by, by that language? And, really, the overarching message, Rich, is that our guidance for both interest rates and asset purchases will keep monetary policy accommodative until our maximum employment and price stability goals are achieved, and that’s, that’s a powerful message. So “substantial further progress” means what it says. It means we’ll be looking for employment to be substantially closer to assessments of its maximum level and inflation to be substantially closer to our 2 percent longer run goal before we start making adjustments to our purchases. I would also point out that by increasing our asset holdings, we see ourselves as adding policy accommodation. There will come a time when the economy does not require increasing amounts of policy accommodation. And when that time comes—and that will be uncertain and, in any case, is, is some ways off. So I can’t give you an exact set of numbers. We will—of course, as we approach that point, we’ll be evaluating that. And when we see ourselves on a path to achieve that goal, then we will—we will say so undoubtedly well in advance of any time when we would actually consider gradually tapering the pace of purchases. . So, you know, again, I would start with what we actually did at the meeting, which, which was, we provided this, this guidance about the path of asset purchases. And I just went through what, what they—what they—the guidance that we put forward. And, you know, so I guess since September we’ve now adopted a flexible average inflation targeting framework. We have provided rate guidance that is tightly linked to the goals as expressed in that new framework. And now we’ve done the same for, for asset purchases. So, you know, we’ve, we’ve been sort of—as, as the future has become clearer and as we’ve absorbed new developments in medical—in the medical sphere and also in, in the economy, we have—began to be able to see further. So we’ve, we’ve started to be able to provide further important guidance. And we think that the—that the asset purchase guidance, guidance is very important. We think that the, the prior language of “in coming months” was obviously temporary. This links that guidance, those purchases, to actual “substantial further progress” toward our, our mandated goals. We think that’s important. And we think that that is important to have done. I, I would just add, though, that we also continue to think that our current policy stance is appropriate. We think it’s providing a great deal of support for the economy. Financial conditions are highly accommodative. And, you know, we monitor a range of financial condition indexes. There are many of them, and they’ll, they’ll all pretty much tell you that. You can—you can also look at the interest sensitive parts of the economy—for example, housing, durable sales, vehicle sales—those parts of the economy are, are performing very, very well. The parts of the economy that are weak are the service sector businesses that involve close contact. Those are not being held back by financial conditions, but rather by the spread of the virus. And I’ll close by, by just saying, we do have the flexibility to provide more accommodation through the channel you mentioned and through other channels. And we recognize that circumstances could shift in a way that warrants our, our doing that, including by adjusting purchases. We are committed to using our full range of tools to support the U.S. economy to achieve our goals. We will continue to use our tools to support the economy for as long as it takes until the job is well and truly done. No one should doubt that. . Well, Nick, I—on, on the first part of the question, I, I don’t—I wouldn’t want to sort of talk about hypothetical situations. You know, we, we look at our overall stance of policy, we look at overall financial conditions, we look at what’s going on in the economy—different parts of the economy, and we ask ourselves, should we change our policy stance? We do that at every meeting. And we look at where financial conditions are now, and, and we, we feel that they are appropriate for now. Anytime we feel like the economy could, could use stronger accommodation, we would be prepared to provide it. We—but right now, we’re providing a great deal, and we think—we happen to think it’s the right amount. And, you know, you, you mentioned—I think you’re referring to the idea of maintaining the duration but, but reducing the quantity, which is sort of what the Bank of Canada did. And that, that is something that we—you know, that we talked about in the last meeting and was addressed in the minutes. And I would say, the views on that were mixed: Some thought it was an interesting idea, others not so much. I, I wouldn’t say that that’s something that’s, that’s high on our list of, of possibilities. . So on your—on your first question, we really have not thought about that. We’re, we’re very focused on—we have a lot to do now. We, we have not focused on, on that question, and I, I really have nothing to add on that. Your second question is—sorry. Oh, if there were no—yes. No, we, we would have the ability—certainly, we would have the ability to do facilities under 13(3) in some cases with no backing. But we can’t do any 13(3) facilities without the approval of the Treasury Secretary, right? But we did some facilities—I think one of our facilities this time didn’t have any Treasury backing. And I think some in the—in the round of—during the Global Financial Crisis also didn’t have any. . I would say that we are—you know, we’re—we have the authorities we have. We will use them if, if they’re needed and if—and if the law permits us to do so. We would—we would always do that. We, we do not have any plans for, for the future about this. We—we’re very focused on, on getting through year end. We’ve been very focused on, on the issues that are right in front of us. And, honestly, we’re not—we’re not planning on anything or having any discussions about what we might do down the road. . Okay. So on, on fiscal policy, I would just say a couple of things. The case for fiscal policy right now is, is very, very strong. And I think that is widely understood, I would say, now. The details of it are entirely up to Congress. But with the expiration of unemployment benefits—some of the unemployment benefits, the expiration of eviction moratoriums with the virus spreading the way it is, there’s a need for households and businesses to have, have fiscal support. And I do think that—again, I think that is widely understood. So I think it would be—I, I certainly would welcome the work that Congress is doing right now. It’s not up to us to judge that work. It’s really, really theirs. And I, I don’t have a view for you on, on the size of it. It’s—you know, it’s obviously a substantial bill. On the surge, you know, so it’s a really interesting question. We have, and others too, have consistently expected there to be more economic—that, that cases would hold—growth in cases would hold back the economy more than it actually has. So we’ve overestimated the, the effects on the economy of, of these spikes we’ve been having. Now, this spike is so much larger that I think—and I think forecasters generally do think that there—that this will have an effect on suppressing activity, particularly activity that involves people getting together in bars and restaurants, on airplanes and hotels and things like that. And you’re starting to see that. In the—in the high frequency data, you’re now beginning to see that show up. And I think if this is—the case numbers are so high and so widespread across the country that that, that seems like it must happen. Now, how big will it be? We don’t—we don’t really know. You know, there are—there are a lot of estimates. The general expectation is, you’re seeing some slowing now. And you’ll see the first quarter could well be—what, what we said is that coming months are going to be challenging. The first quarter will, will certainly show significant effects from this. At the same time, people are getting vaccinated now. They’re getting vaccinated. And by the end of the first quarter into the second quarter, you’re going to be seeing significant numbers of people vaccinated. And so then what will be—how will that play into economic activity? Again, we don’t have any experience with this. You have to think that sometime in the middle of next year, you will—you will see people feeling comfortable going out and engaging in a broader range of activities. And some people will be probably quick to do that. Some are doing it now without a vaccine—right?—in many parts of the country. So, nonetheless, my expectation—and I think many people have the expectation that the second half of next year should—the economy should be performing strongly. We should be— you know, we should be getting people back to work. Businesses should be reopening and that kind of thing. The issue is more the next four or five months—getting through the next four, five, six months. That is key. And, and, you know, clearly there’s going to be need for help there. And, and, you know, my sense and hope is that we’ll be getting that. . You know, so we monitor basically just about every asset price in the economy, and housing prices are something that we’ve been monitoring. And you see them moving up. You see very high demand. This, this is the housing market that people have been expecting since, you know, 2010. And, and then, you know, not many, when the—when the pandemic hit, thought, “Oh, this is what—this is what will produce that housing market,” but it has. Now, I would say, from a financial stability standpoint, housing prices are not—are not of a level of concern right now. That’s just reflective of a lot of demand. And, you know, builders are going to bring forth supply. There’s also a sense that this—some of this may be pent up demand from when the economy was closed, which would imply that demand—once that demand is met, that the real level of demand will be more manageable. So it’s a—it’s a healthy economy now. We, we met recently with a bunch of homebuilders, and many of them in the business 30, 40 years said they’ve never seen the likes of it. But, no, housing prices themselves are not—are not a financial stability concern at the moment. We will watch that carefully. But in the near term, I wouldn’t think that that’s an issue that we’d be concerned about. . There is more that we can do, certainly. We can—we can expand our, our asset purchase programs. We can focus them more on the longer end. There are a number of options we would have to provide more support to the economy. So I would—I would say, though, that in the near term, the help that people need isn’t just from low interest rates that stimulates demand over time and works with long and variable lags. It’s really support. As the—as—we’ve, we’ve talked about this as all of these government policies trying to work together to create a bridge across this chasm, economic chasm that was created by the pandemic. And for many Americans, that bridge is there and, and they’re across it. But there’s a group for, for which they, they don’t have a bridge yet. And that’s who we’re talking about here. It’s, it’s the 10 million people who lost their jobs. It’s people who may lose their homes. It’s—you know, you see the, the—many, many millions of Americans are, are waiting in food lines in their cars these days all over the country. So we know there’s need out there. We know there are small businesses all over the country that, that have been basically unable to really function, and they’re just hanging on. So—and, and they’re, they’re so critical to our economy. So—and, by the way, now that we can—we can kind of see the light at the end of the tunnel, it would be—it would be bad to see, you know, people losing their business, their life’s work in many cases, or even generations’ worth of work, because they couldn’t last another few months, which is what it amounts to. So we have more we can do. And we’ll—I, I think more the issue is, we’re going to need to continue to provide support to this economy for quite a period of time, because the, the economy will be growing in expectation. We should be growing at a fairly healthy clip by the second half of next year. But it’s going to be a while before we really are back to the levels of, of labor market—the, the sort of conditions in the labor market that we had in early this year and for much of the last couple of years. So that’s how I think about it. . So, in terms of the vaccine, yes, you know, we do estimates of, of when the United States would reach herd immunity, and they’re, they’re going to be similar to what other people think. You know, it depends on your assumptions, such as how many people will actually take the vaccine and how fast will the rollout be. So it’s assumption based on assumption based on assumption. But, you know, sometime—it’s possible sometime in the middle or second half of next year. I’m not going to try to be precise, because it’s just another estimate. You know, our people are very good, but they’re looking at, at the same data as other people are. And so, you know, all the estimates are—it depends on what your assumptions are. But under a normal set of assumptions, it could happen as, as soon as the middle of next year. In terms of the, you know, inflation, a couple things—your second question. You know, we’re—I think you have to be honest with yourself about, about inflation these days. There are—there are significant disinflationary pressures around the world, and there have been for a while, and they persist today. It’s, is not going to be easy to have inflation move up. And it isn’t going to be just a question—it’s going to take some time. It took a long time to get inflation back to 2 percent in the last crisis. And, you know, we’re, we’re honest with ourselves and with you in the SEP that even with the very high level of accommodation that we’re providing both through low rates and very high levels of asset purchases, it will take some time, because that’s what we believe the underlying inflation dynamics are in our economy. And that’s sort of why we’re—one reason why we’re concerned about inflation is that we see that. And, and that’s why we have adopted the flexible average inflation targeting framework. That’s why we’re aiming for an overshoot. But we’re, we’re honest with ourselves and with the public that it will take some time to get there. In terms of, you know, would, would it really speed it up a lot to, to move asset purchases, you know, I don’t think that would really be—I think it’s going to take a long time however you do it. And, you know, we’ve been having very long expansions since—in, in the last several decades because inflation has not—really, the old model was, inflation would come along and the Fed would tighten, and we’d have a recession. Now inflation has been low, and we haven’t had that dynamic. And the result has been three of the four longest expansions in, in modern history, in recorded history. So, you know, we’re, we’re thinking that this could be another long expansion, and that we’ll keep our—what we’re saying is, we’re going to keep policy highly accommodative until the expansion is well down the tracks. And we’re not going to preemptively raise rates until we see inflation actually reaching 2 percent and being on track to exceed 2 percent. That’s a very strong commitment, and we think that’s the right place to be. . I’m just going to add, markets have actually found this fairly credible. If you look at what—at inflation compensation and at the survey measures of, of when the Fed will lift off, everything has moved. There have been significant movements since we announced the framework in the direction that is consistent with the—with the framework being credible to market participants. So I, I don’t think it’s something that—I, I mean, I’m actually pleased by, by the reception it’s gotten in markets. And markets have moved in ways that suggest it is credible. . So the—you’re, you’re talking about the—sorry, the Network [of Central Banks and Supervisors] for Greening the Financial System, which we joined this week. And I’ll just—I’ll just say a couple things about that. So, first, I’ll just start by saying that we’re going to move carefully and thoughtfully on developing an understanding of how climate change affects our work, including the areas you mentioned. We’re going to do so with a great deal of engagement with all of our external constituencies, including the public and their elected representatives who are charged with our oversight. We’ll do it with great transparency. Remember that we are a nonpolitical agency whose goals and authorities to achieve those goals are set by Congress. We have great responsibilities and strong authorities that we’ll use vigorously. We’re not the forum where all the great issues of the day are to be hashed out, debated, and addressed unless and only to the extent that those issues are directly relevant to our statutory goals and are addressable through our legal authorities. And because we have a narrow remit, and because we stick to it, Congress has given us a precious grant of independence from direct political control. So society’s broad response to climate change is for others to decide—in particular, elected leaders. But—so let me—let me get to your question. What does all that mean for an issue like climate change? And why did we join the NGFS? So Congress hasn’t explicitly assigned us or other financial regulators a role, and we’re not among the agencies who contribute to the National Climate Assessment—Climate Assessment, for example. But climate change is nonetheless relevant to our existing mandates under the law. And let me tell you why. One of our jobs is to regulate and supervise banks and to look after the stability of the financial system. That’s a responsibility we share with other agencies. The public will expect that we will—we will do that. So we’ll, we’ll expect that, that those important institutions will be resilient against the many resists—risks that they fake—face: credit risk, market risk, cyber risk. Climate change is an emerging risk to financial institutions, the financial system, and the economy. And we are, as so many others are, in the very early stages of understanding what that means, what needs to be done about it, and by whom. That’s why 83 central banks have joined together to share research and identify best practices in this important emerging area. We’ve been attending NGFS meetings as an observer for more than a year, taking part in the work. We had discussed that it was probably time to join as a member. I’ll just say that the financial system is really a global one. It’s important that we work and discuss best practices with peer agencies around the world, especially in a field where we’re just beginning to develop our, our understanding. You asked about monetary policy. You know, I—I’ll say this. We, we have historically shied away strongly from taking a role in credit allocation. In fact, our agreement with Treasury during the financial crisis from back in 2009 or ’10 says that we will avoid credit allocation. It’s something we’ve carefully avoided. So I, I would be very reluctant to see us move in that direction, picking one area as creditworthy and another not. So you asked about monetary policy. You know, it’s, it’s—for now, I would say the real—the real concern is—the real place to focus, for me, is supervision of financial institutions and then financial stability concerns. You can see a connection there. Monetary policy, maximum employment, stable prices—it’s less obvious to me. I can—I can, you know—I can make the argument, but it’s less obvious to me that those should be first order things that we would look at in connection with climate change. But I think there’s—I think there’s work to be done to understand the connection between climate change and the strength and resilience of financial markets and financial institutions. I think that work is in its early days. And, again, we’ll be careful. We’ll be thorough and transparent and, and engage with the public on all that. . Okay. So the state and local governments, they provide important critical services: safety, fire, police, health, all kinds of things like that. They’re, they’re really involved in people’s lives, state and local governments are, to, to a large extent. The decision whether to, to provide more fiscal support to them is entirely in the hands of Congress. And, you know, they’re in the middle of these discussions, and, and those, those are issues for them to decide. I would say that the picture is mixed. What’s happened is, if you’re a state that has a significant exposure to tourism or to extracting energy from the ground—oil from the ground, or gas—you are probably, at least in those industries, feeling a significant loss of revenue. A number of other states have been surprised on the upside, where—and that’s because goods sales, for example—property taxes are—don’t move much year to year. And, you know, the kind of sales taxes on goods—goods sales have been very high. Income has been more or less replaced by, by the CARES Act—fully replaced, more than, in many cases. So the concerns that we had at the very beginning of really serious, deep shortfalls and massive budget cuts on the part of state and local governments have not yet—have not yet occurred. What we’re seeing is, is that it’s different state to state. And some states are having significant difficulties, others not so much. The real concern, though, that still emerges is, state and local governments are very large employers, and—one of the largest. And so far, since the pandemic began, employment has dropped by 1.3 million in—of state and local government. So it’s, it’s a very large number of people to be—to be out of work from just that one source. It’s actually significantly more than lost their jobs during the Global Financial Crisis. So that is—that is a significant—a significant part of that group is, is in education. So when the schools reopen, a significant part of that 1.3 million would go back to work. Nonetheless, it’s a concern. We’re, we’re watching carefully to understand why that—why that many people have been let go and what are—really are the sources. So we’re monitoring it carefully, and it’s a mixed picture. And I, I just have to leave the question of what to do with fiscal policy on this to Congress. . Right. So I, I could go back, James, to what I said earlier, which is, this is—this is a very, very large asset purchase program. It’s providing a tremendous amount of, of support for the economy. If you look at the interest sensitive parts of the economy, they’re performing very well. The parts that are not performing well are not struggling from high interest rates. They’re struggling from exposure to, to COVID, in a sense. These are—these are the businesses that, that are really hit hard by people’s reluctance to gather closely. So, so we, we do have the ability to—you know, to buy more bonds or to buy longer term bonds. And, and we may—we may use it. I’m not saying we won’t—we won’t use that. It may well come to, to using that. But also, I would remind—I would also note, though, monetary policy works with “long and variable lags,” is the famous statement. So we think that the big effects from monetary policy are, you know, months and months into the future. So this looks like a—you know, it looks like a time when what is really needed is fiscal policy. And, and that’s why it is, is a very positive thing that, that we’re getting that. So we, we remain open to doing—you know, to, to either increasing the size of our asset purchases, if that turns out to be appropriate, or to just moving the maturities, moving to buying longer maturities, because that had—that also increases accommodation by taking more duration risk out of the market. But we think our current stance is appropriate. And we think that our— you know, that our, our guidance on asset purchases today will also provide support to the economy over time. Again, what we’ve—what we’ve done is, we’ve laid out a path whereby we’re going to keep monetary policy highly accommodative for a long time, really until—really until we reach very close to our goals, which is not, you know, not really the way it’s been done in the past. So that’s, that’s providing significant support for the economy now. We don’t think the economy suffers from a lack of, of highly accommodative financial conditions. We think it’s suffering from the pandemic and people wanting to not engage in certain kinds of economic activity. And we expect that, that with the virus, that that will improve—that condition will improve. Nonetheless, again, we will—are prepared to use our tools, and we will use them at such time and in such amounts as we—as we think would, would help. . So that, that has all the markings of a transient increase in the price level. So you can imagine that as people really want to travel again—let’s say, you know, that airfare, airfares—I’m just imagining this, right?—that they go up. But what inflation is, is a process whereby they go up year upon year upon year upon year. And if—given the inflation dynamics that we’ve had over the last several decades, just a single, single sort of price level increase has not resulted in ongoing price level increases. And that, that was—the problem back in the 1970s was, it was the combination of two things. One, when unemployment went down and resources got tight, prices started going up. But the second problem was that that—that that increase was persistent, there was a level of persistence. So if prices went up 6 percent this year, they’d go up 6 percent next year, because people would internalize. I mean, really, really, that’s what happens is, people internalize that they can raise prices, and that it’s okay to pay prices that are going up at that rate. So that was the inflation—those are the inflation dynamics of that era. Those dynamics are not in place anymore. There—the connection between low unemployment or other resource utilization and inflation is so much weaker than it was. It’s still there, but it’s a—it’s a faint heartbeat compared to what it was. And the persistence of inflation, if you—if you get a—for example, oil prices go up, and that’ll send a temporary shock through the economy. The persistence of that into, into inflation over time is just not there. So they— what you describe may happen, and, of course, we would watch it very carefully. We, we understand that we will always be learning new things from the economy about how it will behave in certain cases. But I would—I would expect, though, going in that that would be a one time price increase rather than an increase in underlying inflation that would be persistent. . No. . No, no. Definitely not. . Right. So—you were breaking up a little. I think—I think I got the sense of it, though. Yes, I, I don’t think it’s at all a foregone conclusion that there needs to be a permanent Fed presence. And we certainly don’t—you know, that’s not something we’re planning on or intending. Right now we’re buying assets because it’s a—you know, it’s a—it’s a time when the economy needs highly accommodative monetary policy, and we think our asset purchases are, you know, one of the main delivery mechanisms for that, the size of the balance sheet. You know, there’s lots of demand for, for U.S. Treasury paper all—from all over the world. And I, I think we need to be thoughtful about the structure of the Treasury market and look at ways to make sure that the capacity is there for it to be handled by the private sector. And there’s, there’s quite a lot of work going on on that front. But I, I don’t presume at all that, that this is something that needs to be—where the Fed needs to be in there at all. I, I would think that this should be handled by the private sector and can be. Institutions need to be able to hold this paper. And there may be—there may be a central clearing angle that would, you know, net a lot of risk. That’s, that’s yet to be proven. There are a lot of things that are being looked at right now. . I think the main thing that those companies need is a—is a robust recovery—a strong, robust recovery. And so we, we contribute to that through highly accommodative monetary policy, through accommodative financial conditions that are supporting economic activity. Health authorities are contributing to that through, through, you know, management of the spread of the virus and now through vaccines and the delivery of those vaccines. And Congress contributes, contributes to that by helping them make it through this very difficult time. And, and I think my understanding is that there’s support for small businesses in, in what’s being discussed on Capitol Hill. I would certainly think that would be something well worth looking at. . So, you know, we’ve had a—and I’ve had sort of the typical meetings with the transition team for Treasury. They’ve met with quite a lot of people in our agency and other agencies. And, really, it’s about learning what we do. And I, I really have only spoken to former Chair Yellen to congratulate her on being nominated and just to say that I look forward to working with her. You know, I did work very closely with her for five years before she left and have stayed in touch, you know. So I did that. But I have not discussed, you know, policy with her. And I, I’m not going to do that until she’s confirmed. . You, you were breaking up, but I, I think I got that. I think I got it. So, you know, financial stability—we, we look at a broad range of things. We actually have a framework so that we can, you know, be—evaluate changes in financial stability over time, and so that the public can evaluate whether we’re doing a job—a good job at it. We—so what do we look at? Asset prices is one thing that we look at. And, you know, we published a report a few weeks ago on that—maybe it was month or so ago. Anyway. And I think you’ll find a mixed bag there. It depends—with equities, it depends on whether you’re looking at P/Es or whether you’re looking at the premium over risk free—over the risk free return. If you look at P/Es, they’re historically high, but, you know, in a world where the— where the risk free rate is sustain—is going to be low for a sustained period, the equity premium, which is really the reward you get for taking equity risk, would be what you’d look at. And that’s not at, at incredibly low levels, which would mean that they’re not overpriced in that sense. Admittedly, P/Es are high, but that’s—you know, that’s, that’s maybe not as relevant in a world where we think the 10 year Treasury is going to be lower than it’s been historically, from a—from a return perspective. You know, we look at—we also look at borrowing—leverage of financial institutions. We spent 10 years and the banks spent 10 years building up their capital. So far, they’ve been a source of strength through this crisis, and their capital has held up well. We look at leverage in the nonfinancial sector—that’s households and nonfinancial corporates. Nonfinancial corporate leverage is high. We’ve been watching that. But, you know, rates are really low. So—and so companies have been able to handle their debt loads even in weak periods, because rates are— rates are quite low. Your interest payments are low. Defaults and downgrades have, have declined since earlier in the year. Households came into this very strong, and there certainly has been a hit there for people who are unemployed. But, you know, with the CARES Act, Congress replaced a lot of lost income. You know, it’s very important that, that the economy gets strong again. I mean, the, the ultimate thing to support financial stability is a strong economy. The last thing is, is really funding markets. We found that there was a lot of unstable funding for companies, particularly financial companies. And that’s, that’s down to a—to a very low level these days. So the broad financial stability picture is, is kind of mixed, I would say. I would say, you know, asset prices are, are a little high in that metric and in my view. But, overall, you have a mixed picture. You, you don’t have, you know, a lot of red flags on that. So—and it’s—again, it’s something that we monitor essentially ongoing, almost daily. You know, we’re, we’re monitoring these prices for that and, and have published our, our framework, and, you know, we’ll be held accountable for what we saw and what we missed. So we work very hard at it. . So people who—people who run for elected office and win, they’re the ones—their reward is they get to make those very difficult decisions. And—you know, so we’re not charged with providing fiscal advice to, to Congress. But I, I would just say, as a general—as a general rule, it is important to be on a sustainable fiscal path. For my way of thinking and many others’, the time to focus on that is when the economy is strong and when unemployment is low and taxes are—you know, are, are pouring in, and there’s, there’s room to get on—get on a sustainable path, because the economy’s really doing well. You’re still now in the—in the, you know, some part of, of an economic crisis. And the fact that Congress is debating a fairly large bill today suggests that, that—you know, suggests that something fairly substantial is going to get done, we hope—that what’s being discussed is, you know, is, is of some size. In terms of what is a sustainable level, I think, you know, it’s—the question is—we’ve always looked at debt to GDP, and we’re very high by that measure. By some other measures, we’re actually not that high. In particular, you can look at the real interest rate payments, the amount of, what does it cost? And from that standpoint, if you—if you sort of take real interest costs of the federal deficit and divide that by GDP, we’re actually—you know, we’re actually on a more sustainable fiscal path if you look at it through those eyes. Again, these are—these are issues for Congress. But, you know, I’ll just say in the near term, I think fiscal—the case for, for fiscal is, is strong. And I’m certainly hoping—I think it will be very good for the economy if, if we did get something soon. . Yeah, I mean, that’s—I think we’re a very, very long way from that. You know, the, the Congress has given the Fed independence on the condition that we stick to our knitting. We try very hard to do that. And I, I think that’s, that’s what people call fiscal dominance. And I, I think we’re just a very, very long way from that. I think, you know, if we—if we do our jobs well and support the economy and achieve maximum employment and stable prices, keep the financial system stable, I don’t think that that is something that will—that I would worry about, certainly not in the near term. . Thank you.

****FOMCpresconf20210127

. Good afternoon. At the Federal Reserve, we are strongly committed to achieving the monetary policy goals that Congress has given us: maximum employment and price stability. Since the beginning of the pandemic, we have taken forceful actions to provide relief and stability, to ensure that the recovery will be as strong as possible, and to limit lasting damage to the economy. Today my colleagues on the FOMC and I kept interest rates near zero and maintained our sizable asset purchases. These measures, along with our strong guidance on interest rates and our balance sheet, will ensure that monetary policy will continue to deliver powerful support to the economy until the recovery is complete. The path of the economy continues to depend significantly on the course of the virus. A resurgence in recent months in COVID 19 cases, hospitalizations, and deaths is causing great hardship for millions of Americans and is weighing on economic activity and job creation. Following a sharp rebound in economic activity last summer, the pace of the recovery has moderated in recent months, with the weakness concentrated in the sectors of the economy most adversely affected by the resurgence of the virus and by greater social distancing. Household spending on services remains low, especially in sectors that typically require people to gather closely, including travel and hospitality. And household spending on goods has moderated following earlier large gains. In contrast, the housing sector has more than fully recovered from the downturn, supported in part by low mortgage interest rates. Business investment and manufacturing production have also picked up. The overall recovery in economic activity since last spring is due in part to federal stimulus payments and expanded unemployment benefits, which have provided essential support to many families and individuals. The recently enacted Coronavirus Response and Relief Act [Consolidated Appropriations Act, 2021] will provide additional support. Overall economic activity remains below its level before the pandemic, and the path ahead remains highly uncertain. As with overall economic activity, the pace of improvement in the labor market has slowed in recent months. Employment fell by 140,000 in December, as continued gains in many industries were outweighed by significant losses in industries where the resurgence of the virus has weighed further on activity. In particular, the leisure and hospitality sector lost nearly half a million jobs, largely from restaurants and bars. The unemployment rate remained elevated at 6.7 percent in December, and participation in the labor market is notably below pre pandemic levels. Although there has been much progress in the labor market since the spring, millions of Americans remain out of work. The economic downturn has not fallen equally on all Americans, and those least able to shoulder the burden have been the hardest hit. In particular, the high level of joblessness has been especially severe for lower wage workers in the service sector and for African Americans and Hispanics. The economic dislocation has upended many lives and created great uncertainty about the future. The pandemic has also left a significant imprint on inflation. Following large declines in the spring, consumer prices picked up over the summer but have leveled out more recently. For those sectors that have been most adversely affected by the pandemic, prices remain particularly soft. Overall, on a 12 month basis, inflation remains below our 2 percent longer run objective. While we should not underestimate the challenges we currently face, several developments point to an improved outlook for later this year. Sufficiently widespread vaccinations would enable us to put the pandemic behind us and return to more normal economic activities. In the meantime, continued observance of social distancing measures and wearing masks will help us reach that goal as soon as possible. Support from fiscal policy will help households and businesses weather the downturn as well as limit lasting damage to the economy that could otherwise impede the recovery. In addition, as we have seen since last summer, the economy has proved more resilient than expected, in part reflecting the adaptability of households and businesses. Finally, monetary policy is playing a key role in supporting the recovery and will continue to do so. The Fed’s response to this crisis has been guided by our mandate to promote maximum employment and stable prices for the American people, along with our responsibilities to promote the stability of the financial system. Today we unanimously reaffirmed our Statement on Longer Run Goals and Monetary Policy Strategy, as we typically do each January. As we say in that statement, we view maximum employment as a “broad based and inclusive goal.” Our ability to achieve maximum employment in the years ahead depends importantly on having longer term inflation expectations well anchored at 2 percent. As the Committee reiterated in today’s policy statement, with inflation running persistently below 2 percent, we will aim to achieve inflation moderately above 2 percent for some time so that inflation averages 2 percent over time and longer term inflation expectations remain well anchored at 2 percent. We expect to maintain an accommodative stance of monetary policy until these employment and inflation outcomes are achieved. With regard to interest rates, we continue to expect it will be appropriate to maintain the current 0 to ¼ percent target range for the federal funds rate until labor market conditions have reached levels consistent with the Committee’s assessment of maximum employment and inflation has risen to 2 percent and is on track to moderately exceed 2 percent for some time. In addition, we will continue to increase our holdings of Treasury securities by at least $80 billion per month and of agency mortgage backed securities by at least $40 billion per month until substantial further progress has been made toward our maximum employment and price stability goals. The increase in our balance sheet since last March has materially eased financial conditions and is providing substantial support to the economy. The economy is a long way from our employment and inflation goals, and it is likely to take some time for substantial further progress to be achieved. Our forward guidance for the federal funds rate, along with our balance sheet guidance, will ensure that the stance of monetary policy remains highly accommodative as the recovery progresses. Our guidance is outcome based and ties the path of the federal funds rate and the balance sheet to progress toward reaching our employment and inflation goals. Thus, if progress toward our goals were to slow, the guidance would convey our intention to increase policy accommodation through a lower expected path of the federal funds rate and a higher expected path of the balance sheet. Overall, our interest rate and balance sheet tools are providing powerful support to the economy and will continue to do so. We’ve also taken actions to more directly support the flow of credit in the economy, deploying our emergency lending powers to an unprecedented extent, enabled in large part by financial backing and support from Congress and the Treasury. Although the CARES Act facilities are no—are no longer open to new activity, our other facilities remain in place. To conclude, we understand that our actions affect communities, families, and businesses across the country. Everything we do is in service to our public mission. We are committed to using our full range of tools to support the economy and to help assure that the recovery from this difficult period will be as robust as possible. Thank you. I look forward to your questions. . So, on, on your first question, I don’t want to comment on a particular company or, or day’s market activity or things like that. It’s just not really something that I would typically comment on. In terms of macroprudential policy tools, so, as you know, no doubt, we rely on sort of always on, through the cycle macroprudential policy tools, particularly the stress tests and also the elevated levels of liquidity and capital and, and, and also resolution planning that we—that we impose on the largest financial institutions. We don’t use time varying tests and tools as some other countries do. And we think it’s a good approach because—for us to use ones that are always on—because we don’t really think we’d be successful in every case in picking the exact right time to intervene in markets. So that’s for banks. You really asked about nonbanks, the nonbank sector. And so we monitor financial conditions very broadly. And while we don’t have jurisdiction over, over many areas in the nonbank sector, other agencies do. And so we do coordinate through the Financial Stability Oversight Council and with other agencies who have responsibility for, for nonbank supervision. And, in fact, as you know, in the last crisis, the banking system held up fairly well so far. And, and the dislocations that we saw from the outsized economic and financial shock of the pandemic really appeared in the nonbank sector. So that’s—right now we are engaged in, in carefully examining, understanding, and thinking about what, what in the nonbank sector will need to be addressed in the next year or so. . Thank you. So I guess I’d start by saying that the, the fiscal response that we’ve seen to this downturn has been strong, and I think we can say now that it’s been sustained after the passage of the—of the, the most recent act in, in late December. And that’s really a key reason why the recovery has been as strong as it’s been. Fiscal policy has been absolutely essential. When we look back on, on the history of this period, we’ll see a strong and sustained fiscal policy response. I would—I would add that we’re, as I mentioned, a long way from a full recovery. Something like 9 million people remain unemployed as a consequence of the pandemic. That’s as many people as lost their jobs at the peak of the Global Financial Crisis and the Great Recession. Many small businesses are under pressure, and there are other needs to be addressed. And the path ahead is still pretty uncertain. So, all of that said, the judgment on how much to spend and in what way is really one for Congress and the Administration and not for the Fed. And these discussions are going on right now. So there’s a discussion, as you know, right now around, around those precise questions, and, and that’s appropriate, but not for us to play a role in talking about specific policies. . Let me—let me provide a little context. The shock that the—from the pandemic was unprecedented both in its nature and in its size and in the amount of unemployment that it created and in the shock to economic activity. There’s nothing close to it in our modern economic history. So our response was really to that. And we—we’ve done what we could, first, to restore market function and to provide a bit of relief, then to support the recovery. And, hopefully, we’ll be able to do the third thing, which is to avoid longer run damage to the—to the economy. Our role assigned by Congress is maximum employment and stable prices and also look after financial stability. So, in a world where, almost a year later, we’re, we’re still 9 million jobs, at least—that’s one way of counting it  it can actually be counted much higher than that— short of maximum employment and people are out of the labor force who were in the labor force—the real unemployment rate is close to 10 percent if you include people that’ve left the labor force—it’s very much appropriate that monetary policy be highly accommodative to support maximum employment and price stability, which is getting inflation back to 2 percent and averaging 2 percent over time. So, on, on matters of financial stability, we have a framework. We don’t look at one thing or two things. We look at—and we made that framework public after the financial crisis so that it could be criticized and understood and we could be held accountable. And, you know, the things that we look at are—we do look at asset prices. We also look at leverage in the banking system. We look at leverage in the non—the nonbanking system, which is to say, corporates and households. And we look at also funding risk. And if you look at it across that range of, of, of readings, they’re each different, but we monitor them carefully. And I would say that financial stability vulnerabilities overall are moderate. Our overall goal is to assure that the financial system itself is resilient to, to shocks of all kinds, that it’s strong and resilient. And that includes not just the banks, but money market funds and, and all different kinds of nonbank financial structures as well. So when we get to the nonfinancial sector, we don’t—we don’t have jurisdiction over that. But—so I would just say that our—that there are many things that go in, as you know, to, to setting asset prices. So if you look at what’s really been driving asset prices, really, in the last couple of months, it isn’t monetary policy. It’s been expectations about vaccines. And it’s also financial—sorry, fiscal policy. Those are—those are the news items that have been driving, driving asset purchases—sorry, asset values in, in recent months. So I, I know that monetary policy does play a role there, but that’s how we look at it. And I think, you know, I think that the connection between low interest rates and, and asset values is probably something that’s not as tight as people think, because a lot of—a lot of different factors are driving asset prices at any given time. . So, you know, that’s—as you know, that’s one of the very difficult questions in all of monetary policy. And we don’t rule it out as a theoretical matter, but we, we clearly look to macroprudential tools, regulatory tools, supervisory tools, other kinds of tools rather than monetary policy in, in addressing financial stability issues. It’s not—you know, the, the monetary policy we know strengthens economic activity and job creation through fairly well  understood channels. And a strong economy is actually a great supporter of financial stability. That will mean strong, you know, well capitalized institutions, and, and households will be— will be working. And, and so we know that. We don’t actually understand the tradeoff between—the sense of it is, would you—if you raise interest rates and thereby tighten financial conditions and reduce economic activity now in order to address asset bubbles and things like that, what—will that even help? Will it—will it actually cause more damage, or will it help? So I think that’s unresolved. And I, I think it’s, it’s something we, we look at as not, not theoretically ruled out but not something we, we—we’ve ever done and not something we would plan to do. We would rely on macroprudential and other tools to deal with financial stability issues. . So, on inflation, a couple of things—there are a couple of things that are worth mentioning. One is just that we know that we measure inflation on a trailing 12 month basis. And as we—as we lap the very low inflation readings of March and April of last year, we’ll see measured 12 month inflation move up a few tenths. This is just—they’re called base effects, and, and that’s a—that’s a transient thing that we think will pass. There’s also the possibility—indeed, it’s in some forecasts—that as the economy fully reopens, there’ll be a burst of spending, and—because people will be enthusiastic that the pandemic is over, potentially, and that that could also create some upward pressure on inflation. Now, again, we would see that as something likely to be transient and not to be very large. In both cases, we don’t see those as either lasting or particularly large. So the way we would react is, we’re going to be patient. Expect us to wait and see and not react if we see small and what we would review—we would view as very likely to be transient effects on inflation. I think if you—you know, it helps to look back at, at the inflation dynamics that the United States has had now for some decades and notice that there has been, you know, significant disinflationary pressure for some time, for a couple of decades. Inflation has averaged less than 2 percent for a quarter of a century. And the inflation dynamics, with the flat Phillips curve and low persistence of inflation, is very much intact. Those things, they change over time. We understand that inflation dynamics evolve constantly over time, but they don’t change rapidly. So we think it’s very unlikely that anything we see now would result in, you know, troubling inflation. Of course, if we did get sustained inflation at a level that was uncomfortable, we have tools for that. It’s far harder to deal with, with too low inflation. We know what to do with higher inflation, which is, you know, should the need arise, we, we would have those tools. And we don’t expect to see that at all. In terms of how much, you know, what we’ve said is we’d like to see—because inflation has been running persistently below 2 percent, we’d like to see it run moderately above 2 percent for some time. We have not adopted a formula. We’re not going to adopt a formula. We’re going to—we, we use policy rules and formulas in everything we do, consult them constantly, but we don’t set policy by them. We don’t do that. And so we’re going to preserve an element of judgment. And, again, we’ll seek inflation moderately above 2 percent for some time. And we’ll, we’ll show what that means when we get inflation above 2 percent. The, the way to achieve credibility on that is to actually do it. And so that’s what we’re planning on doing. . So, in terms of the rollout of the vaccines, we see what everyone else sees, right? We see that we’re, we’re vaccinating people and at a rate of about a million a day, apparently, and that it’ll take quite a while to get—to get to the numbers that the experts say are required to get to herd immunity. And we think it’s going to be a struggle. You’ll notice that we, we said that the, the pandemic still, still provides considerable downside risks to the economy. And that’s one of the reasons why, is that—is the slowness of the rollout. The other—another reason why is just the arrival of these new virus strains. We don’t know how to—we don’t know how to model that. You know, we can have a base case, but we realize no one knows how the—how this new vaccine will roll out, how successful it will be, how high we’ll be able to drive vaccination, and those sorts of things. So we have a base case, and we—but we always—we always look at, at the range of possibilities. In this case, we particularly look at the downside risks. You know, that’s really what we do is, we, we set policies so that we’re, we’re, you know, we’re going to remain accommodative until we actually see improvement in the economy and not just in the outlook, in the data. So that’s, that’s how we think about, about that. And I would—I would also add, there’s nothing more important to the economy now than, than people getting vaccinated. You know, if you—if you, you think about the places where the economy is weak—I mentioned bars and restaurants. That’s 400,000 jobs we lost last month, and that’s all because of the spread of the pandemic. Many other areas of the economy— actually, there was actually job creation in—you know, in goods production and in some service parts—industries as well. But we’re just not going to be able to get that last group of people back to work—and it’s a big group of people—until we get the pandemic behind us. We, we have not won this yet. We haven’t succeeded in doing this yet, and we need to stay focused on it as a country and, and get there. And, you know, we clearly can, but we’re going to have to stay focused. And that includes—you know, that includes us at the Fed, monetary policy. I, I have been vaccinated once, and I expect to get my second vaccine sometime soon. Thank you. . No, we haven’t—we haven’t done that. I mean, remember, we’re, we’re focused on maximum employment, price stability, financial stability as I defined it—the broad financial sector. And, and that—that’s not, you know—over the years, we, we consult the fact that we have that authority. But, no, it’s not something we’re looking at right now at all. . Well, first, I—we, we think our policy stance is, is just right. We think it’s providing significant support for economic activity and hiring. We, you know, we, we adopted a new monetary policy framework of flexible average inflation targeting in August. In September, we, we implemented rate guidance that, that was consistent with and based on that new framework. In December, we did the same for asset purchases. So we now have, you know, strong guidance on, on rates and on asset purchases that’s providing very strong support for economic activity. If you look at the sectors of the economy that are interest sensitive, you will see very strong activity: housing, durable goods, automobile sales. So, you know, our, our policies are working. And we think that, that they are—we think our policy stance is, is right. That said, there’s clearly more that we can do. With asset purchases, for example, we can, you know—that’s, that’s a tool we can do more—we can strengthen our guidance, too, if we were to think that that were appropriate. What you see is an economy where what’s holding it back is not the lack of, of policy support from the Fed. It’s the pandemic. It’s, it’s the spread of the disease and people’s reluctance or, or inability to partake in certain kinds of economic activities, which amount to a, a meaningful part of the economy. So that’s, that’s what I would say. We certainly have things that we can do, but we think we’re—we think we’re in the right place. You know, in terms of—in terms of tapering, it’s just premature. We just created the, the guidance. We said we’d want to see substantial further progress toward our goals before we modify our, our asset purchase guidance. It’s just too early to be talking about dates, which we should be focused on, on progress. We’ll need to see actual progress. And when, when we see ourselves getting to that point, we’ll communicate clearly about it to, to the public so nobody will be surprised when the time comes. And we’ll do that well in advance of actually considering what will be a pretty gradual taper. . Yes. So, you know, I, I was here—we had all the same questions back in—after the Global Financial Crisis. We raised interest rates. We froze the balance sheet size, and then we shrank the balance sheet size. So there’s no reason why we, we won’t be able to do that again. In fact, we learned a lot from that experience. And, you know, we, we understand—as we understood then, but even more so—we understand that the—that the way to do it is to communicate well in advance, to, to do predictable things, and to move gradually. And that’s, that’s what we’re going to do. We’re going to be very transparent. But, honestly, no—you know, the whole focus on exit is premature, if I may say. We’re focused on finishing the job we’re doing, which is to support the economy, to give the economy the support it needs. There are people out there who’ve lost their jobs. It’s essential that we get them back to work as quickly as possible, and we want to do everything we can to do that. And that is our primary focus right now. It’s, it’s, it’s too soon to be—to be worried about that. You know, when we come to exit, we have a—we have an understanding of how to do that, and we’ll do it very carefully. But in the meantime, our focus is on giving the economy the support it needs. . I, I would say that, again, we have been struggling with disinflationary forces for some time. If you look around the world—look in Western Europe, look at Japan—around the world, large economies have, have felt much more downward pressure on inflation, have fallen short of their inflation goals, for some time now. That is the broad global macroeconomic context that we all live in. And we believe that those global forces—which are, you know, aging demographics, advancing technology, and globalization—those, those forces are still in effect. Now, they may slow down, and, and it’s, it’s an interesting question, the extent to which, for example, globalization may slow down or even reverse. Notwithstanding that, inflation dynamics in the United States have, have consisted of a flat Phillips curve and low persistence for, for a long time. We do not expect in the near term that that will change significantly. It may evolve over time, but significant time. You know, these things are—these things are, are changing, but they don’t change at a rapid rate. And there’s—I, I don’t believe that, that they will. So I wouldn’t—I’m, I’m not—I’m much more worried about falling short of a complete recovery and losing people’s careers and lives that they—that they built because they don’t get to work—back to work in time and things like that. I’m more concerned about that and the damage that will do not just to their lives, but to the United States economy, to the productive capacity of the economy. I’m more concerned about that than about the possibility, which exists, of higher inflation. Frankly, we welcome slightly higher inflation, somewhat higher inflation. The kind of troubling inflation that people like me grew up with seems, seems far away and unlikely in, in the both domestic and global context that we’ve been in for some time. . Okay. So I have the highest respect and admiration for Secretary Yellen. And I’m, I’m sure that we’re going to have a, a good working relationship together. Absolutely sure. We’ll also have a good institutional relationship between the Fed and the Treasury. And I expect that that’ll be very good and, and very productive. It’ll be collaborative. We’ll work together. Now, the way that works is, is that, you know, we know—the agencies know each other well, and this is true of finance ministries and central banks around the world. We know to stay in our lanes. We know we have different authorities. We know that we work together on some things to—you know, for the benefit of the public. And I’m, I’m absolutely sure that we’re going to do that. I, you know, haven’t—I haven’t spoken to, to Secretary Yellen—I’m going to be calling her “Chair Yellen” most of the time, so you just have to be patient with me—Secretary Yellen. I haven’t spoken to her since I congratulated her on being nominated. I do expect very soon to begin our regular calls or—and, and ultimately meetings, which have gone on, really, for, you know, 70 years. The Treasury Secretary and the, and the Fed Chair have had weekly or so meetings, lunches, breakfast, calls, depending on the situation. So I expect that will—that will happen soon. I’ve—I have not met the, the President, President Biden. And just, you know, I, I, I don’t—I don’t have any comment on your—on your last question. I wouldn’t want to comment one way or the other. . So I—I’ll just say that I think our facilities were very successful in supporting the economy during its darkest moments and I believe saved—protected the loss of millions of jobs. We’re going to continue to monitor financial and credit conditions throughout the economy. And, and if the kind of emergency conditions arise that are required under that law, then our emergency lending tools will remain available. Now, I’ve had no discussions with anybody at Treasury on that, because I haven’t had any discussions with anybody at Treasury other than meet—you know, high level meetings with the—with the transition team a month or so ago. And once we start having those, those meetings, of course, I’ll observe, you know, the long standing practice of not talking about confidential discussions. But as of now, there haven’t been any discussions at all. . Yes. So in the statement, on the language, we dropped “in the medium term,” because, really, the risks are, are in the near term, frankly. You know, as I mentioned, it’s the rollout of the vaccine. It’s the arrival of new strains that, that are more contagious and perhaps more virulent. And those are the—those are the—and also just the ongoing—third thing, of course, is the ongoing spread of the virus. It’s, it’s in the near term. It’s not in the medium term. We were thinking—when we were thinking “medium term,” we were thinking of longer term scarring and things like that. Nonetheless, I mean, I think what—to go to your, your second question, and as I mentioned in my, in my opening remarks—there is good evidence to, to support a stronger economy in the second half of this year. In fact, if you look at, at—as we do—look at a range of private forecasters, what was their forecast in, in December, and what’s their forecast now? Right across the board: much higher forecasts for 2021 growth. And that’s because of the ongoing rollout of the vaccines and also because of fiscal policy, expectations, and the reality of, of the CRRA Act [Consolidated Appropriations Act, 2021] getting done. So there is—there is a positive case there. But that—think of that as—the sort of base case is, is a strong economy in the second half of the year. The language says that there’s still—I forget the exact language—downside risks. We used an adjective. It was “considerable”—“considerable risks to the economic outlook.” So there are considerable risks, risks to the economic outlook. Nonetheless, that is—that is a more positive outlook. And that’s really how, how I would—I would parse that for you. I don’t know when we’re going to come back to work, and I’m, I’m actually in the Eccles Building here today. And I don’t know when that’ll be. I mean, we—I can’t wait to be working in person again. But, you know, we—we’ve been able to work successfully remotely. We really have. And, you know, we’re not going to push people when they’re uncomfortable. We’re going to wait till people are comfortable and wait till it’s well and truly time to get back together in person. . Okay. So we’re, we’re monitoring that on an ongoing basis, continue to—continuing to evaluate our, our restrictions. And we haven’t made a decision about whether to continue them in the second quarter or not. We’re just going to look at bank—we’re going to look at the whole range of, of information, including economic activity, banking activity, the, the success in vaccination. All of those things will go into our assessment of what the right answer is to that question. I think we’ve been careful about, about rolling back those restrictions. And, and I’m pleased with where we are. Let’s remember that the banks—that the banks that are subject to the stress tests have taken very, very large reserves—very large loss reserves, and also increased their capital. They’ve actually had—they have higher capital ratios now than they had at the beginning of the pandemic. So the banking system has held up well here. And, and—but, you know, we’re going to be careful about this and, you know, move based on data, and all of the data, when we make that decision. . So, on housing, you know, housing is now—the level of housing activity is at its highest level since before the Global Financial Crisis, in some measures. So we’ve had a very strong rebound in housing. Some of the, the tightness in housing markets, we think—which has led to the, the significant price increases this year—we think is, is a passing phenomenon. There was a lot of pent up demand. There’s a one time thing happening with people who are spending all of their time in their house, and they’re thinking either “I need a bigger house” or “I need another house and a different house—or a second house,” in some cases. So there’s just—there’s a—there’s a one  time shift in demand that we think will get satisfied—also, that will call forth supply. And that will—that will, we think—we think that those price increases are unlikely to be sustained for, for all of those reasons. So you asked about corporate debt, I guess? . So we, we monitor pretty much all of the big financial markets pretty carefully. And, you know, what’s happened in, in the corporate debt market, beginning with the announcement of our corporate credit facility, has been, you’ve seen lenders lending and borrowers borrowing. You’ve seen relatively significantly fewer defaults than we—than we expected. There were a lot of downgrades and some defaults at the beginning, and those have really slowed down. And, by the way, the same is true for bank loans. Banks are not experiencing the kinds of defaults that, that we all were concerned about in the early months of the pandemic. It’s just not materializing. So they’re having to reverse some of their loss reserves, actually. Debts—corporate debt spreads are, are tight. They’ve tightened. They were very broad—high—wide, of course, at the—during the acute phase of the pandemic, and they’ve— you know, they’re now at the lower end of their typical range. And we do monitor that. You know, it’s, it’s not something we can control or operate on directly, but we do—we do watch those things. And, you know, in a sense, it’s good that companies have been able to finance themselves during this period, because they—they’ve been able to stay in business. They’ve been able to keep their employees working. And, you know, that’s a good thing. And that’s, that’s part of highly accommodative financial conditions. . You know, the, the, the big thing is that the jury’s out. And this has been a concern since the very beginning, is the concern that people—if, if they become disconnected from the industry or the job where—that they used to work in, it, it can be years or never when they get back into the labor force, particularly for people who are well along in their careers—the same kind of scarring for small businesses, which don’t have the kind of resources that you need to get through this. So we’ve, we’ve had a big concern about, about both of those. We haven’t seen as much of it as we—as we feared. And that’s a good thing. But as I said that, you know, the jury is out here—9 or 10 million people still out of work because of the pandemic. They’re—a big chunk of them are people who worked in public facing jobs in the service sector. And, you know, they’ve gotten a lot of support from fiscal policy and some from monetary policy. But the question is getting them back to work. And, you know, it’s, it’s harder if you’re—it takes longer, empirically, to find that next job if you’re looking at a brand new industry. It’s not easy to change careers completely midcareer. So that just, again, stresses the urgency that we feel and others feel at, at, you know, fully defeating the pandemic, finishing the job and getting back to a place where it’s safe to have these—you know, to, to, to stay in hotels, to fly on airplanes, to go to sporting events and movie theaters, and all of those things. So those people are still at risk. And we’re, we’re very, very focused on that group of people with our policy and, and, and, you know, the way we look at the economy. So many people have had that bridge across the pandemic. You know, we talked about that at the beginning. For many people, it’s clear that they’ve made it across, and their job is okay, and their house is okay. And, you know, it’s been terribly inconvenient and painful, and schools are closed and things like that. But there, there’s a bunch of people yet who haven’t found that bridge yet. And we’re, we’re very focused on that. Of course, the other thing is, we’re going to a different economy. And we’re going to be learning more about that as we go. But, clearly, we’re, we’re learning that things can be done from remote locations. We’re learning that technology can replace people even more than we thought. And some of that is happening. So I think as we, you know, as we get into this, you know, the phase after—even after the economy fully reopens, I think we’re still going to need to keep people in mind whose lives have been disrupted, because they’ve lost that—the work that they did. And I think it would be wise as a country, for the longer run productive capacity of the country, if we were to look out for those people and help them find their way back into the labor force even if it means continuing support for an additional period of time. . I strongly agree with that, as a matter of fact. I think if you look at either—look at employment gaps or unemployment gaps or wage gaps, wealth gaps, homeowning gaps, all of those persistent gaps that exist even controlling for many other factors, you will see that they’re, they’re persistent, they’re—and they’re very difficult to explain. And so it’s—the reason we talk about inequality and, and racial inequality in particular, is that it goes to our job, which is to achieve maximum employment, which, which links up with, with—we want—we want the potential output of the United States to be as high as it can possibly be. We want—we want an economy where everybody can take part and everybody, everybody can put their labor in, and they can share in the prosperity of our great economy. That’s what we want. And that’s how the U.S. economy can be bigger, stronger, growing faster, is if we can achieve a more—a broader prosperity. So, now, in terms of our tools, you know, of course, that project that I just mentioned is one for the broader society, for the private sector, for fiscal policy, but we have a role to play. And, and that is, how we think about the labor market. Principally, when we say that the maximum employment is a, a broad and inclusive goal, what we’re—what we’re saying there is, we’re not just going to look at the headline—and we never did, really, but—we’re not going to just look at the headline numbers. We’re going to look at different demographic groups, including women, minorities, and others. And we’re not going to say that we’ve reached maximum employment, which is our statutory goal, until we’ve reached maximum employment. And you haven’t if, if there’s lots of pockets of, of people not participating in or not employed in the labor market. So those are the things that we can do. We also do a tremendous amount of research on these issues. You know, we do—we, we have such a focus on these issues now that we actually—we, we have a new, a webpage, relatively new, where you can access all of it. But it’s a lot of activities in our Division of Consumer and Community Affairs. It’s lots of research, and, and it’s also, you know, our enforcement of the fair lending laws and things like that. So I think everybody’s got a role to play here. It’s a—it’s a national goal and a national job, and we’re just going to do our part of the job. And it’s something we’re strongly committed to. . Well, yes. So I think, if you go back to the—to the beginning, there was a real concern. I mean, just, just take the financial markets, for example. Suddenly, all of those big buildings all over the, the—New York City and all around the world where people work in the financial markets with terminals and everything, everybody had to go home, and they had to take their terminals with them. And I think there was a real concern that there would be a tremendous loss of functionality just at the time when the financial markets were under historically difficult conditions. And yet, it worked out okay. So I think people—many people in the financial sector are still working with their terminals at home, including people on trading floors or on virtual trading floors. Now, some of that’s reversing now. But we have definitely learned that we can do more work from home in many, many different lines of work. Of course, that’s not possible if your job involves being at a place, doing personal services. For many people, it’s not possible. And that’s very much something that skews to higher income, higher educated people being able to work from home and others not so much. So I think we’ve learned that. The other thing, though, even conditional on that, when we saw the wave in the South and the West, the wave of cases this summer, I think, intuitively, having seen what happened in March and April, we expected there to be a significant hit to economic activity. And people kind of just got on with their lives and went and, and dealt with it. And, and it didn’t actually—it had a much smaller effect on economic activity than we expected. Then comes the fall wave, which is just so much larger—a very, very large wave as, as was very much forecast. People going indoors, the cold weather, all of that. And even there, if you look at—I would say, look at the December jobs report. So, big job losses in, you know, in that part of the service sector. So I mentioned 400,000 jobs in bars and restaurants. There’s another 100,000 in similar kinds of activities. But if you go—if you look elsewhere, it’s not having an effect. You know, even purchasing manager index and sentiment indexes on, on areas of the economy that are not directly—really directly—exposed to the pandemic in their economic activity, they’re doing okay. They are. Housing is a great example. You know, the way—the way—the way the housing industry worked, that when you buy a house, there was a lot of in person contact. They managed to pretty much immediately go to a more virtual—you know, with all the technology. They were able to completely avoid that. And the housing market has been really strong, notwithstanding that it’s, it’s now quite virtual rather than in person. So there’s been a lot of adapting, and—but you can’t adapt, you know, hotels, sporting venues, movie theaters, restaurants, bars. You just—you know, those are just going to—and that’s—again, that’s millions and millions of people. And so you’re just going to have to defeat the pandemic, which, as I mentioned, you know, we, we have a plan to do that, but we haven’t done it yet. And we need to—we need to finish the job. And we—it’s, it’s within our power to do that as a country this year. And I would just urge that—and I know people are working hard on that. But that, that is really the main thing about the economy, is, is getting the pandemic under control, getting everyone vaccinated, getting people wearing masks, and all that. That’s the single most important economic growth policy that we can have. Thank you.

****FOMCpresconf20210317

. Good afternoon. I would like to start by noting that it has been a full year since the pandemic arrived with force on our shores. Looking back, it was clear that addressing a fast moving global pandemic would be plainly and primarily the realm of health  care providers and experts, and we are grateful to them and to all the essential workers for their service and sacrifice. The danger to the U.S. economy was also clear. Congress provided by far the fastest and largest response to any postwar economic downturn, offering fiscal support for households, businesses, health care providers, and state and local governments. Here at the Federal Reserve, we rapidly deployed our full range of tools to provide relief and stability, to ensure that the recovery will be as strong as possible, and to limit lasting damage to the economy. We are strongly committed to achieving the monetary policy goals that Congress has given us: maximum employment and price stability. The economic fallout has been real and widespread, but with the benefit of perspective, we can say that some of the very worst economic outcomes have been avoided by swift and forceful action—from Congress, from across government, and in cities and towns across the country. More people held on to their jobs, more businesses kept their doors open, and more incomes were saved as a result of these swift and forceful policy actions. And while we welcome these positive developments, no one should be complacent. At the Fed, we will continue to provide the economy the support that it needs for as long as it takes. Today the FOMC kept interest rates near zero and maintained our sizable asset purchases. These measures, along with our strong guidance on interest rates and on our balance sheet, will ensure that monetary policy will continue to deliver powerful support to the economy until the recovery is complete. The path of the economy continues to depend significantly on the course of the virus and the measures undertaken to control its spread. Since January, the number of new cases, hospitalizations, and deaths has fallen, and ongoing vaccinations offer hope for a return to more normal conditions later this year. In the meantime, continued observance of social distancing measures and wearing masks will help us reach that goal as soon as possible. The economic recovery remains uneven and far from complete, and the path ahead remains uncertain. Following the moderation in the pace of the recovery that began toward the end of last year, indicators of economic activity and employment have turned up recently, although the sectors of the economy most adversely affected by the resurgence of the virus and by greater social distancing remain weak. Household spending on goods has risen notably so far this year. In contrast, household spending on services remains low, especially in services that typically require people to gather closely, including travel and hospitality. The housing sector has more than fully recovered from the downturn, while business investment and manufacturing production have also picked up. The overall recovery in economic activity since last spring is due importantly to unprecedented fiscal and monetary policy actions, which have provided essential support to households, businesses, and communities. The recovery has progressed more quickly than generally expected, and forecasts from FOMC participants for economic growth this year have been revised up notably since our December Summary of Economic Projections. In commenting on the stronger outlook, participants noted progress on vaccinations as well as recent fiscal policy. As with overall economic activity, conditions in the labor market have turned up recently. Employment rose by 379,000 in February, as the leisure and hospitality sector recouped about two thirds of the jobs that were lost in December and January. Nonetheless, employment in this sector is more than 3 million below its level at the onset of the pandemic. For the economy as a whole, employment is 9.5 million below its pre pandemic level. The unemployment rate remains elevated at 6.2 percent in February  this figure understates the shortfall in employment, particularly as participation in the labor market remains notably below pre pandemic levels. Looking ahead, FOMC participants project the unemployment rate to continue to decline  the median projection is 4.5 percent at the end of this year and moves down to 3.5 percent by the end of 2023. The economic downturn has not fallen equally on all Americans, and those least able to shoulder the burden have been the hardest hit. In particular, the high level of joblessness has been especially severe for lower wage workers in the service sector and for African Americans and Hispanics. The economic dislocation has upended many lives and created great uncertainty about the future. Overall inflation remains below our 2 percent longer run objective. Over the next few months, 12 month measures of inflation will move up as the very low readings from March and April of last year fall out of the calculation. Beyond these base effects, we could also see upward pressure on prices if spending rebounds quickly as the economy continues to reopen, particularly if supply bottlenecks limit how quickly production can respond in the near term. However, these one time increases in prices are likely to have only transient effects on inflation. The median inflation projection of FOMC participants is 2.4 percent this year and declines to 2 percent next year before moving back up by the end of 2023. The Fed’s response to this crisis has been guided by our mandate to promote maximum employment and stable prices for the American people, along with our responsibilities to promote the financial—the stability of the financial system. As we say in our Statement on Longer Run Goals and Monetary Policy Strategy, we view maximum employment as a “broad  based and inclusive goal.” Our ability to achieve maximum employment in the years ahead depends importantly on having longer term inflation expectations well anchored at 2 percent. As the Committee reiterated in today’s policy statement, with inflation running persistently below 2 percent, we will aim to achieve inflation moderately above 2 percent for some time so that inflation averages 2 percent over time and longer term inflation expectations remain well anchored at 2 percent. We expect to maintain an accommodative stance of monetary policy until these employment and inflation outcomes are achieved. With regard to interest rates, we continue to expect it will be appropriate to maintain the current 0 to ¼ percent target range for the federal funds rate until labor market conditions have reached levels consistent with the Committee’s assessment of maximum employment and inflation has risen to 2 percent and is on track to moderately exceed 2 percent for some time. I would note that a transitory rise in inflation above 2 percent, as seems likely to occur this year, would not meet this standard. In addition, we will continue to increase our holdings of Treasury securities by at least $80 billion per month and of agency mortgage backed securities by at least $40 billion per month until substantial further progress has been made toward our maximum employment and price stability goals. The increase in our balance sheet since last March has materially eased financial conditions and is providing substantial support to the economy. The economy is a long way from our employment and inflation goals, and it is likely to take some time for substantial further progress to be achieved. Our forward guidance for the federal funds rate, along with our balance sheet guidance, will ensure that the stance of monetary policy remains highly accommodative as the recovery progresses. Our guidance is outcome based and ties the path of the federal funds rate and the balance sheet to progress toward reaching our employment and inflation goals. Overall, our interest rate and balance sheet tools are providing powerful support to the economy and will continue to do so. To conclude, we understand that our actions affect communities, families, and businesses across the country. Everything we do is in service to our public mission. We are committed to using our full range of tools to support the economy and to help assure that the recovery from this difficult period will be as robust as possible. Thank you. I look forward to your questions. . [Laughter] Not yet. So, as you—as you pointed out, we’ve said that we would continue asset purchases at this pace until we see substantial further progress. And that’s actual progress, not forecast progress. So—and that’s a difference from, from our past approach. So—and what we mean by that is, is pretty straightforward. It is, we want to see that, that the labor markets have moved—labor market conditions have moved—you know, have made substantial progress toward maximum employment, and inflation has made substantial progress toward the 2 percent goal. That’s what we’re going to want to see. Now, that obviously includes an element of judgment. And when we see—we’ll be—we’ll be carefully looking ahead. We, we also understand that we, we will want to provide as much advance notice of any potential taper as possible. So when we see that we’re on track, when we see actual data coming in that suggests that we’re on track to perhaps achieve substantial further progress, then we’ll say so. And we’ll say so well in advance of any decision to actually taper. . I, I don’t see that at all. You know, we, we have a, a range of perspectives on the Committee. I welcome that. And, you know, we, we have—we debate things, we discuss things, and we always come together around a—around a, a solution. But, you know, the, the strong bulk of the Committee is, is not showing a rate increase during this forecast period. And, you know, as, as data improve, as the outlook improves very significantly since the December meeting, you would expect forecasts to move up. It’s probably not a surprise that some people would bring in their estimate of the appropriate time for liftoff. Nonetheless, you know, the bulk of the Committee—the, the largest part by far of the Committee is, is—doesn’t show a rate increase during this period. And, again, part of that is wanting to see actual data rather than just a forecast at this point. We do expect that we’ll begin to make faster progress on both spending—you know, labor markets and inflation as the year goes on because of the progress with the vaccines, because of the fiscal support that we’re getting. We expect that to happen. But, you know, we’ll have to see it first. . Victoria, we’ll have something to announce on that in coming days. And I’m not going to expound upon your questions. Why don’t you—why don’t you ask another question if you’d like to? Because, because that one—I’m just going to say that we’ll have something in coming days. . Well, let me say, as we say in our Statement on Longer Run Goals and Monetary Policy Strategy, we look to a range of indicators on the labor market. We never only looked at the unemployment rate, which is the only indicator of, of labor market outcomes that’s in the SEP. We look at a very broad range. You hear us talk all the time about participation  about employment to population, which is the combination of the two  about different measures of, of unemployment. So it’s wages, it’s, it’s the job flows, it’s, you know, all of those things. They go into an assessment—disparities of various groups. All that goes into an assessment of maximum employment. The, the—trying to incorporate all of that into the Summary of Economic Projections would not be practical. You know, obviously, the thing that we do include is just the unemployment rate, and that’s a very insufficient statistic. So—it, it doesn’t include a lot of other things that we—that we do look at. And I, I wouldn’t want to say that we’re looking to include the other dozen things that we look at into the SEP. But at time—from time to time, we do look at, at adding different things. But I, I would just say the SEP is, it’s a summary. It’s one device. It’s not going to include all of the things that we look at. I think you know the things that we look at—we, we talk about them all the time. So we’re not actually looking actively at significantly broadening those indicators in the SEP right now. . So I guess the first thing to say is that the, the SEP is not a Committee forecast. It’s, it’s not something we sit around and debate and discuss and approve, and say, “This represents our, you know, our reaction function as a Committee.” It’s a compilation of projections from different people. And I—since we don’t debate it or discuss it, it would be hard for me to say why—exactly why each participant did what they were going to do. So all I would say about this is that we’ve—we laid out what I think is very clear guidance on liftoff. And it’s really three things: labor market conditions that are consistent with our estimates of maximum employment—and, as I mentioned, we consider a wide range of indicators in assessing labor market conditions, not just the unemployment rate  inflation that has reached 2 percent, and not just on a transitory basis  and inflation that’s on track to run moderately above 2 percent for some time. The first two of those three are very much data based  the third does have a little bit of a—of an element of expectations in it. So we are very much determined to implement this guidance in a robust way. It is the guidance that we chose carefully to implement our new framework. And to meet these standards, we’ll need to see data, as I mentioned. So what does—what does this, this SEP really say? It says that we’re committed to our framework and to the guidance we’ve provided to implement that framework. We will wait until the requirements set forth in that guidance are clearly met before considering a change in our policy rate. And the last thing I’ll say is this: The state of the economy in two or three years is highly uncertain, and I wouldn’t want to focus too much on the exact timing of a potential rate increase that far into the future. So that’s how I would think about the, the SEP. . So we’ve said we’d like to see inflation run moderately above 2 percent for some time. And we’ve resisted, basically, generally, the temptation to try to quantify that. Part of that just is, talking about inflation is one thing  actually having inflation run above 2 percent is the real thing. So I—you know, over the years we’ve, we’ve talked about 2 percent inflation as a goal, but we haven’t achieved it. So I, I would say we’d like to, you know, perform. That’s what we’d really like to do, is to get inflation moderately above 2 percent. I don’t want to be too specific about what that means, because I think it’s hard to do that. And we haven’t done it yet. You know, when we’re actually above 2 percent, we can do that. I—look, I, I would say this. The fundamental change in, in our framework is that we, we’re not going to act preemptively based on forecasts for the most part. And we’re going to wait to see actual data. And I think it will take people time to, to adjust to that—and to adjust to that new practice. And the only way we can really build the credibility of that is by doing it. So that’s how I would think about that. . So, on, on herd immunity, I, I’m really going to leave that question to the experts. We don’t control that. We’re not responsible for defining it. And we’ll, we’ll leave that whole discussion to the experts. I mean, we’re—what we’re focused on is, is the part that we control, which is the support that we provide to the economy. And there we’ve provided very clear guidance. And in the case of asset purchases, it’s at their current level until we make substantial further progress. There is an element of judgment in that, and we’ll, we’ll— therefore, we’ll supply clear communication well in advance of, of actually tapering, and we just went through, you know, the, the criteria for raising interest rates. They’re very specific. And, you know, we’re, we’re very much committed to having them fulfilled robustly. I, I would agree with you that the, the path of the virus continues to be very important. We, we have these, you know, new strains with—which, which can be quite virulent. And we’re not actually done yet. And I, I—we’re clearly on a good path with, with cases coming down, as I mentioned, but we’re not done. And I’d hate to see us take our eye off the ball before we actually finish the job. So that’s how I would look at that. . I think there’s some of that. Sure, there’ll be some of that. There will still be some social distancing. People may be, for example, going into spaces that, that, you know, that involve close contact with others. Some people will do that right away. Others will hold back. And so I think there’ll—there’ll be some of that. In addition, though, remember, there are—there are 10 million people—in the range of 10 million people who need to get back to work. And it’s going to take some time for that to happen. You know, it can—it can happen maybe, maybe more quickly than it has in the past, because it involves the reopening of a sector of the economy, as opposed to stimulating aggregate demand and waiting for that to produce job demand for workers. This could be a different sort of a process. And it could be quicker. We don’t know that. But it’s, it’s just a lot of people who have—who need to get back to work. And it’s not going to happen overnight. It would be—it’s going to take some time. No matter how well the economy performs, unemployment will take quite a time to go—to go down, and so will participation. So that’s all I can say. I think the faster the better  we’d love to see it come sooner rather than later. We’d welcome nothing more than that. But, realistically, given the numbers, it’s going to take some time. . Sure. So we monitor a broad range of financial conditions, and we’re always attentive to market developments, of course. We’re still a long way from our goals, and it’s important that financial conditions do remain accommodative to support the achievement of those goals. And if you look at various indexes of financial conditions, what you’ll see is that they generally do show financial conditions overall to be highly accommodative. And that is appropriate. So that’s, that’s how we look at it. I would add, as I’ve said, I would be concerned by disorderly conditions in markets or by a persistent tightening of financial conditions that threaten the achievement of our goals. We think the stance of our—of monetary policy remains appropriate. Our guidance on the federal funds rate and on asset purchases is providing strong support for the economy. And we’re committed to maintaining that patiently accommodative stance until the job is well and truly done. . You know, we—the tools we have are the tools we have. What I’m telling you is that the stance of monetary policy we have today, we believe, is appropriate. We think that our asset purchases in their current form—which is to say, you know, across the curve, $80 billion in Treasuries, $40 billion in mortgage backed securities on net—we think that that’s, that’s the right place for our asset purchases. Now, we can—we can change them, of course, in, in a number of different dimensions should we deem that that’s appropriate. But, for now, we think that our policy stance on that is appropriate. . So, which measures. So we, we do monitor and communicate very regularly about different labor market—disparities in the labor market, let’s say. So the African American unemployment rate is substantially elevated, and so is the Hispanic unemployment rate. So we look at those and we see those as, you know—it’s, it’s slack in the labor market. It’s, it’s sad to see, because those disparities had really come down to record lows since we started keeping the data that way. As recently as a year ago, February of last year, we had those, those disparities quite low. What happens in a downturn, though, is they move up at twice the speed of white unemployment. So we monitor those things. We—our tools, of course, affect unemployment generally, but we’re going to look at those as, as a form of slack in the labor market and hope that, you know, that there’s progress there. And, and this particular downturn, of course, was just a direct hit on, on a part of the economy that employs many minorities and lower paid workers. The public facing workers in the service industries in many cases don’t have a lot of financial assets, they’re not tremendously well paid, they might have other jobs, and things like that. So this was a direct hit on that part of the economy. And it’s the slowest part of the economy to recover. So, you know, we’d like to see those people continue to get supported, you know, as we—as the broader economy recovers, which, which it’s very much doing now. In terms of disparate levels of vaccination, that’s—those are facts and unfortunate facts. They’re really not something we, we have within our policy toolkit to address. But it is—it is true, though, that the data we have suggests that there are—there are significant disparities between different ethnic groups and—you know, but that’s, that’s not for us. That’s for fiscal authorities and the government more generally to, to work on. . So I do think that fiscal policy overall will have really helped us to avoid much of the scarring that we were very, very concerned about at the beginning. And I think that’s just the size and the speed with which Congress has delivered—you know, with the CARES Act and since then, has—is going to wind up very much accelerating the return to full employment. It’s going to make a huge difference in people’s lives. And it has already. As I mentioned in my remarks—opening remarks, the recovery has been faster than we expected. Part of that just is, it’s very hard to predict, given we’ve never seen an event like this. But part of it is just the strength of the fiscal response, which I think will, will look good over the years. Longer term, you know, to, to really—that’s—the first part of it is about avoiding scarring, and I think we’ve not avoided all of the scarring, but we’ve probably avoided the worst cases there. And, and I hope we keep at it, and we will keep at it with our policies, of course, to do whatever we can to make sure that’s—that continues. Longer term though, what it takes to drive productive capacity per capita or per hour worked, to raise living standards over time, is investment: investment in people’s skills and aptitudes, investment in plant and equipment, investment in software. It takes a lot of investment to, to support a more productive economy and raise living standards. And that’s—you know, that hasn’t been the principal focus with these measures—our measures, certainly. And we don’t have those tools. But what Congress has been doing has mainly been replacing lost income and beginning to, you know, support people as the economy returns to normal. But there should be a focus on—a longer term focus, I think, would be healthy on, on the investment front. . You’re right that the pace of the recovery is that we’re having diverging recoveries here, as we did after the last crisis. And in this case, as well as the other one, the U.S.’s recovery is, is leading the global recovery. And, you know, we conduct policy, of course, here. Our, our focus is on—our, you know—our, our objectives are domestic ones. It’s, it’s maximum employment and price stability here in the United States. We monitor developments abroad, and we know—because they know we know that they can—those can affect our outcomes. So I think U.S. demand—very strong U.S. demand, if, if—as the economy improves is going to support global activity as well over time. That, that’ll be through imports. And, you know, when the U.S. economy is strong, that strength tends to be—tends to support global, global activity as well. So that’s one thing. I don’t—I don’t worry in the near term. I mean, I’d love to see Europe growing faster. I’d love to see the vaccine rollout going more smoothly. But I don’t worry too much about us in the near term, because we’re, we’re on a very good track. Very strong fiscal support coming, now vaccination going quickly, and cases coming down. I think we’re—I think we’re in a good place. It’s all ahead of us, but the data should, should get stronger fairly quickly here and remain strong for some time here. . So we haven’t made a decision on that. We’re a couple weeks away from announcing that decision. I, I won’t foreshadow it here today. I will say, we’re going to continue our data driven approach. You know that we restricted buybacks and dividends, so the firms are preserving capital. Through 2020, the banks actually increased their level of capital and their level of reserves. And the December stress tests showed that banks are strong and well capitalized under our hypothetical recessions that we—that we used in December, which were quite stringent. We’re right in the middle of our 2021 stress tests, and we’ll release those results before the end of June. And that layers, you know, very significant additional stress on top of the stress the banks have already absorbed over the past year, with the unemployment rate going to 11 percent and stock prices falling more than 50 percent. So—but all of that, you know, the results of the stress tests and the decision on distributions—all of that is to come fairly soon, as I mentioned. . Well, you know, it all depends. We’ve set out very clear criteria for liftoff, right, where we’ve said we want to see labor market conditions that are consistent with our estimates of, of maximum employment. And that doesn’t just mean unemployment, it means a much broader set of criteria. We want inflation at 2 percent, and not on a transitory basis. And we want inflation on track to be moderately—to run moderately above 2 percent for some time. Those are the three conditions. Everybody on the Committee agrees to that, right? So it comes down to, what’s your projection for the economy? If you want to—if you want to—you know, people will have a range of, of assessments for how good the economy is going to be. And, you know, we, we don’t—I would say that we’re in a relatively highly uncertain situation. If you look at the uncertainty, people, people on the Committee broadly say that uncertainty about the forecast is, is very high compared to the normal level. We haven’t come out of a pandemic before. We haven’t had this kind of fiscal support before, totaling it all up. So you’re going to have different perspectives from Committee participants about how fast growth will be, how fast the labor market will heal, or how fast—sorry, inflation will move up. And those things are going to dictate where people write down an estimate of liftoff. Of course, this isn’t a decision to lift off now. We’ll make that decision then. But it’s an estimate based on—based on assumptions about growth. And it’s, it’s meant to be a tool to generally show the public how, how our objective function works, how we think about the future. It isn’t meant to actually pin down a time when we might or might not lift off. We—you know, we’re not going to make that decision for some time. The chances are that the economy in that time and place will be very different from the one we think it’ll be. So I—sometimes with the dots, I have to be sure to point out that they—they’re not a Committee forecast. And you know this, but it’s—they’re not a Committee forecast. It’s just compiling these projections, really, of individual people. We think it serves a useful purpose. It’s not meant to, to actually be a promise or even a prediction of when the Committee will act. That will be very much dependent on economic outcomes, which are highly uncertain. . So, Brian, it’s not up to us to decide what, what Congress should spend money on or when. I was answering Jeanna’s question, which really was, how do we assure lack of damage to—scarring, for example, or lack of damage to the productive capacity of the economy? And I think what’s happened so far has done a pretty good job of that. But, really, I wanted to make the longer run point that if—to work on the productivity—on productivity over longer periods, that is—that is—comes down to a number of things. But one of those things is investment: investment in people, in their skills, education, aptitude, all of those things. I’m not in any way suggesting that that’s something Congress should work on right now. Or that, you know, that’s just not my—that’s not our job. I’m just saying, that, that is what fiscal policy can do that, really, monetary policy can’t do—is, is invest in the future productive capacity of the economy, raise potential growth. Those things are completely tools that Congress has. And, again, I wasn’t making a comment at all on the current fiscal setting. . Sure. So, as you know, financial stability for us is, is a framework. It’s not one thing. It’s not a particular market or a particular asset or anything like that. It’s a framework that we, we have. We report on it semiannually, the Board gets a report on it quarterly, and we monitor every day. And it has—it has four pillars, and those are four key vulnerabilities: asset valuations, debt owed by businesses and households, funding risk, and leverage among financial institutions. Those four things. And I’ll just quickly touch on them. So if you look at asset valuations, you can say that by some measures, some asset valuations are elevated compared to history. I think that’s clear. In terms of households and businesses, households entered the, the crisis in very good shape by historical standards. Leverage in the household sector had been just kind of gradually moving down and down and down since the—since the financial crisis. Now, there was—there was some negative effects on that, people lost their jobs and that sort of thing, but they’ve also gotten a lot of support now. So the damage hasn’t been as, as bad as we thought. Businesses, by the same token, had a high debt load coming in. And—but—and many saw their revenues decline. But there’s—they’ve done so much financing, and there’s a lot of cash on their balance sheet. So nothing in those two sectors really jumps out as really troubling. Short term—I mentioned funding risk as the—as the last one. So we saw, again, in this crisis, breakdowns in parts of the short term funding markets—came under a tremendous amount of stress. And they’ve been quiet since the spring. And, you know, we shut down our facilities and all of that. But we, we don’t—we don’t feel like we can let the moment pass without just saying again that we—that those—some aspects of the short term funding markets and, more broadly, nonbank financial intermediation didn’t hold up so well under great stress—under tremendous stress. And we need to go back and look at that. So a very high priority for us as regulators and supervisors is going to be to go back—and this, this will involve all the other regulatory agencies  it does involve all of them as well—and see if we can strengthen those things. So that’s, that’s a—sort of a broader, detailed look. . Well, again, I wouldn’t read too much into, into the, the March 2021 SEP dot plot. Remember what it is: It’s a compilation of individual projections by individual members. They’re all making different assessments. They, they have different forecasts, economic forecasts. Some have more optimistic ones, some less optimistic. And they’re—also remember that the SEP doesn’t actually include all the things that go into maximum employment. Right? It’s, it’s only—it only includes unemployment. So I, I would just say, we’ve set out clear guidance. The—the message from the SEP that I would like to leave with people is, we set out clear guidance. I mentioned what it was. It’s inflation up to—no, sorry, it’s, it’s labor market conditions consistent with our estimates of maximum employment—and that’s not just unemployment, it’s all the other indicators, but, overall, totaling up to maximum employment  it’s inflation at 2 percent, and not on a transient basis  and inflation on track to exceed 2 percent for—moderately for some time. Those are the criteria. We’re committed to robustly implementing that guidance. And that’s what this—that’s what this says. That’s really all it says. We’re going to wait until those requirements are met. And, again, you know, the, the state of the economy in two or three years is highly uncertain. And I wouldn’t want to focus too much on the exact timing of a potential rate increase that far into the future. . So what I would say is, we’re committed to giving the economy the support that it needs to return as quickly as possible to a state of maximum employment and price stability. And, you know, to the extent having rates low and support for monetary policy broadly, to the extent that raises other questions, we think it’s absolutely essential to maintain the strength and stability of the—of the broader financial system and to carefully monitor financial stability questions if that’s what you’re getting at. You know, we, we do that. We will—we monitor them very carefully. I, I would point out that, over the long expansion—the longest in U.S. history, 10 years and 8 months—rates were very low for—they were at zero for, you know, 7 years and then—and then never got above, you know, 2.4 percent, roughly. During that, we didn’t see, actually, excess buildup of debt. We didn’t see asset prices form into bubbles that would threaten the progress of the economy. We didn’t see the things you—we didn’t see a housing bubble. You know, the things that have tended to really hurt an economy and have in recent history hurt the U.S., we didn’t see them build up despite very low rates. Part of that just is that you’re in a low  rate environment, you’re in a much lower rate environment, and the connection between low rates and the kind of financial instability issues is just not as tight as people think it is. That’s not to say we ignore it. We don’t ignore it. We, we watch it very carefully. And we don’t think—we think there is a connection. We say there is, but it’s not quite so clear. We actually monitor financial conditions very, very broadly and carefully. And we didn’t do that before the Global Financial Crisis 12 years ago. Now we do. And we’ve also, you know, put a lot of time and effort into strengthening the large financial institutions that form the core of our financial system—are much stronger, much more resilient. That’s true of the banks. I think it’s true of the CCPs. We want it to be true of, of other nonbank financial intermediation, markets, and, and institutions. So I think that’s, that’s—you know, monetary policy should be, to me, for, for achieving our macroeconomic aims. Financial regulatory policy and supervision should be for strengthening the financial system so that it is strong and robust and can withstand the kinds of things that it couldn’t, frankly—and we learned that in 2008, ’09, ’10. This time around, the regulated part of the financial system held up very well. We, we found some other areas that need strengthening, and that’s what we’re working on now. . I’m sorry, could you repeat that? You broke up there for a second. . Yes, yes. . You’re asking about the relationship between unemployment and inflation? Is that—is that the question? . Okay. . Yes, I think I’m hearing you correctly. So I would say a couple things. There was a time when there was a tight connection between unemployment and inflation. That time is long gone. We had extremely low unemployment in, in—not extremely low. We had low unemployment in 2018 and ’19 and the beginning of ’20 without having troubling inflation at all. We were at 3.5 percent. We were bouncing around with unemployment 3.5 percent to 4 percent. And it wasn’t just unemployment. Participation was high, wages were moving up. It was a very healthy thing. And we didn’t see price inflation move up. There is a relationship between wage inflation and unemployment. But that has not— what, what happens is that when wages move up because unemployment is low, companies have been absorbing that increase into their margins rather than raising prices. And that seems to be a feature of late cycle behavior. So we’re, we’re not—when, when we—when we seek to achieve low unemployment, high levels of employment, which is our mandate, you know, we think we have the freedom to do that based on the data without worrying too much about inflation. . So we’ve said “substantial further progress.” Now, if you go back, October, November—sorry, November, December, and January, progress in the labor market slowed very sharply. So you had an average of 29,000 jobs per month. If you go back and look at the, the level of job creation before that, it was very, very high—very high. So we weren’t making any progress on the labor market from November through January. February, we saw a nice—a nice pickup, a good jobs report—379,465 private sector. So that’s good. It can go so much higher, though. And, and, you know, it would be nice to see—to really make faster progress that’s different from substantial progress, we’d like to see it be, be higher than that. And I think it will be. That’s—the expectation is, you’ll see now, I think, really strong job creation return—not as high as it was in the very early days of the recovery, the reopening of the economy, but, nonetheless, very strong. Okay. So what, what I’m saying is, to achieve substantial progress from where we are, having had three months of, of very little progress, is going to take some time. And it’s—we don’t want to get into—I don’t want to get into trying to put a pin on the calendar someplace, because it’s going to be data dependent. When we see—when we see ourselves on track to make substantial further progress, we’re going to—we’re going to say so. We understand fully that that test is one that involves judgment. If you remember, during the Global Financial Crisis recovery, we said quantitative easing, number three, was—the test was a substantial improvement in the outlook for the labor market. Well, what does that mean? Well, it means a substantial improvement in the outlook for the labor market. It meant we would communicate when we thought we had that. This is just like that, in a way. What we’re saying is, substantial further progress toward our goals. We’ll tell people when we think—until we—until we say—until we give a signal, you can assume we’re not there yet. And as we approach it, well in advance—well in advance—we will give a signal that, yes, we’re on a path to, to possibly achieve that, to consider tapering. So that’s, that’s how we’re planning to handle it. It’s not different, really, from, from QE3. And I think we’ve learned—what we’ve learned from the experience of these last dozen years is to communicate very carefully, very clearly, well in advance, and then follow through with, with your communications. In this case, it’s, it’s an outcome based set of guidance, as our rate guidance is, and it’s going to depend on the progress of the economy. That’s why it’s not appropriate to start pointing at dates yet. . We, you know, we and everyone who’s forecasting these—what, what we’re all doing is, we are looking at the—at the amount of savings. We’re looking at—you know, we have reasonably good data on that. And we’re looking at the government transfers that’ll be made as part of the various laws. And we’re trying to make an assessment on what will be the tendency of people to spend that money, the marginal propensity to consume. And from that, you can develop an estimate of the impact on spending, on growth, on hiring, and, ultimately, on inflation. So that’s, that’s what we’re all doing. And we have, you know, we have—we can look at history, and we can make estimates, and those are all very transparent and public. And you can compare one to the other. And, of course, we’ve all—we’ve all done that. And I think we’ve made very conservative assumptions and sensible mainstream assumptions at each step of that process. And what, what it comes down to is what I said before, which is, there very likely will be a step up in inflation as March and April of last year drop out of the 12 month window, because they were very low inflation numbers. That’s a—that’ll be a fairly significant pop in inflation. It’ll wear off quickly, though, because it—just the way the numbers are calculated. Past that, as the economy reopens, people will start spending more, and then, you know, you can only go out to dinner once per night, but a lot of people can go out to dinner. And so— and they’re not doing that now. They’re not going to restaurants, not going to theaters. That part of the economy—and travel and hotels—that part of the economy is, is really not functioning at, at full capacity, right? But as that happens, people can start to spend. It’s also—wouldn’t be surprising if—and you’re seeing this now, particularly in the goods economy—there’ll be bottlenecks. They won’t be—they won’t be able to service all of the demand maybe, maybe for a period. So those things could lead to—and we’ve, we’ve modeled that. Other people have too. We’ve—and what we see is relatively modest increases in inflation. So—but those are not permanent things. You know, what’ll, what’ll happen is—the supply side—the supply side in the United States is very dynamic. People start businesses, they, they reopen restaurants, you know, the airlines are, will be flying again, all of those things will happen. And so it’ll turn out to be a one—a one time sort of bulge in, in prices, but it won’t change inflation going forward, because inflation expectations are strongly anchored around 2 percent. We know that inflation dynamics do evolve over time. And there was a time when, when inflation went up, it would stay up. And, and that time is not now. That hasn’t been the case for some decades. And we think it won’t—it won’t—we won’t suddenly change to another regime. These things tend to change over time. And they tend to—tend to change when the central bank doesn’t understand that having inflation expectations anchored at 2 percent is the key to it all. The, the—having them anchored at 2 percent is what gives us the ability to push hard when the economy’s really weak. If we saw inflation expectations moving materially above 2 percent, of course, we would conduct policy in a way that would, would make sure that that didn’t happen. We’re committed to having inflation expectations anchored at 2 percent, not materially above or below 2 percent. So that’s—I think if you—if you look at the savings, look at all of that, model it, that’s, that’s kind of what comes out of our assessment. There are different possibilities. I think it’s, it’s a relatively unusual—very unusual situation to have all these savings and this, this amount of fiscal support and monetary policy support. Nonetheless, that, that is our most likely case. And you know, as the—as the data come in and the economy performs, we’ll of course adjust. Our outcome based guidance will immediately adapt, we think, to meet whatever the actual path of the economy is. . You know, I have to say, I think it’s impossible to say, frankly, with any confidence, but I, I would expect it’s very possible—let’s put it that way—that you will see bottlenecks emerge and then clear over time. And you’ll probably see that over a period of time, because, you know, really, the, the strong data are ahead of us. You know, you’re, you’re—right now the, the checks are going out just, just now. And that’ll, that’ll add to spending. COVID cases are coming down. Vaccination is moving, now, quickly. You know, the, the really strong economic data is coming. It should be coming, assuming we stay on this track. And that’s when you’ll really know where, where the bottlenecks are. But you can see, though, that they’re not—these are not permanent. It’s not like the supply side will be unable to adapt to these things. It will—the market will clear. It just may take some time. And, and some of the answer to that may be price. In many cases, it won’t be price. You’ll see that people are reluctant to raise prices. You know, it’s a little bit the story about, you know, the wage—the wage Phillips curve does show that as unemployment goes down, wages move up. But companies choose not to try to, to pass that, that price increase along to their customers. So you’ll see a lot of that here too, I think. Anyway, we’ll, we’ll see. But that’s, that’s my basic, basic sense. Thank you very much.

****FOMCpresconf20210428

. Good afternoon. At the Federal Reserve, we are strongly committed to achieving the monetary policy goals that Congress has given us: maximum employment and price stability. Today my colleagues on the FOMC and I kept interest rates near zero and maintained our sizable asset purchases. These measures, along with our strong guidance on interest rates and on our balance sheet, will ensure that monetary policy will continue to deliver powerful support to the economy until the recovery is complete. Widespread vaccinations, along with unprecedented fiscal policy actions, are also providing strong support to the recovery. Since the beginning of the year, indicators of economic activity and employment have strengthened. Household spending on goods has risen robustly. The housing sector has more than fully recovered from the downturn, while business investment and manufacturing production have also increased. Spending on services has also picked up, including at restaurants and bars. More generally, the sectors of the economy most adversely affected by the pandemic remain weak but have shown improvement. While the recovery has progressed more quickly than generally expected, it remains uneven and far from complete. The path of the economy continues to depend significantly on the course of the virus and the measures undertaken to control its spread. Since March, progress on vaccinations has limited the number of new cases, hospitalizations, and deaths. While the level of new cases remains concerning, especially as it reflects the spread of more infectious strains of the virus, continued vaccinations should allow for a return to more normal economic conditions later this year. In the meantime, continued observance of public health and safety guidance will help us reach that goal as soon as possible. As with overall economic activity, conditions in the labor market have continued to improve. Employment rose 916,000 in March, as the leisure and hospitality sector posted a notable gain for the second consecutive month. Nonetheless, employment in this sector is still more than 3 million below its level at the onset of the pandemic. For the economy as a whole, payroll employment is 8.4 million below its pre pandemic level. The unemployment rate remained elevated at 6 percent in March, and this figure understates the shortfall in employment, particularly as participation in the labor market remains notably below pre pandemic levels. The economic downturn has not fallen equally on all Americans, and those least able to shoulder the burden have been the hardest hit. In particular, the high level of joblessness has been especially severe for lower wage workers in the service sector and for African Americans and Hispanics. The economic dislocation has upended many lives and created great uncertainty about the future. Readings on inflation have increased and are likely to rise somewhat further before moderating. In the near term, 12 month measures of PCE inflation are expected to move above 2 percent as the very low readings from early in the pandemic fall out of the calculation and past increases in oil prices pass through to consumer energy prices. Beyond these effects, we are also likely to see upward pressure on prices from the rebound in spending as the economy continues to reopen, particularly if supply bottlenecks limit how quickly production can respond in the near term. However, these one time increases in prices are likely to have only transitory effects on inflation. The Fed’s response to this crisis has been guided by our mandate to promote maximum employment and stable prices for the American people, along with our responsibilities to promote the stability of the financial system. As we say in our Statement on Longer Run Goals and Monetary Policy Strategy, we view maximum employment as a broad based and inclusive goal. Our ability to achieve maximum employment in the years ahead depends importantly on having longer term inflation expectations well anchored at 2 percent. As the Committee reiterated in today’s policy statement, with inflation running persistently below 2 percent, we will aim to achieve inflation moderately above 2 percent for some time so that inflation averages 2 percent over time and longer term inflation expectations remain well anchored at 2 percent. We expect to maintain an accommodative stance of monetary policy until these employment and inflation outcomes are achieved. With regard to interest rates, we continue to expect it will be appropriate to maintain the current 0 to ¼ percent target range for the federal funds rate until labor market conditions have reached levels consistent with the Committee’s assessment of maximum employment and inflation has risen to 2 percent and is on track to moderately exceed 2 percent for some time. I would note that a transitory rise in inflation above 2 percent this year would not meet this standard. In addition, we will continue to increase our holdings of Treasury securities by at least $80 billion per month and of agency mortgage backed securities by at least $40 billion per month until substantial further progress has been made toward our maximum employment and price stability goals. The increase in our balance sheet since March 2020 has materially eased financial conditions and is providing substantial support to the economy. The economy is a long way from our goals, and it is likely to take some time for substantial further progress to be achieved. Our guidance for interest rates and asset purchases ties the path of the federal funds rate and the size of the balance sheet to our employment and inflation goals. This outcome based guidance will ensure that the stance of monetary policy remains highly accommodative as the recovery progresses. To conclude, we understand that our actions affect communities, families, and businesses across the country. Everything we do is in service to our public mission. We at the Fed will do everything we can to support the economy for as long as it takes to complete the recovery. Thank you. I look forward to your questions. . Thank you. So, no, it is not time yet. We’ve said that we would let the public know when it is time to have that conversation, and we said we’d do that well in advance of any actual decision to taper our asset purchases, and we will do so. In the meantime, we’ll be monitoring progress toward our goals. We first articulated this “substantial further progress” test at our December meeting. Economic activity and hiring have just recently picked up after slowing over the winter. And it will take some time before we see substantial further progress. . Yes, so we have to leave questions about herd immunity and what that looks like to the health experts, but, but I would certainly say that what matters the most to the economic recovery continues to be controlling the virus. The economy can’t fully recover until people are confident that it’s safe to resume activities involving crowds of people. There may be people who are around the edges of the labor force who won’t come back in unless they feel really comfortable going back to their old jobs, for example, and there, there may be parts of the economy that will—that just won’t be able to, to really fully reengage until the pandemic is decisively behind us. But, you know, we’ve articulated particular guidance for tapering our asset purchases and for lifting off and raising interest rates. So for, for asset purchases, we’ve said that we would continue at the current pace of asset purchases until we see substantial further progress toward our goals. So—and that is, that is what it is, substantial further progress. For interest rates, as I—as I said a moment ago, we want to see labor market conditions consistent with maximum employment, we want to see inflation at 2 percent, and we want to see it on track to exceed 2 percent. So those are our tests. We don’t have an independent test to do with the virus. I will say, though, as I—as I started with, you know, the, the path of the virus is going to have an effect on our ability to achieve both of those tests. . Right. So it seems unlikely, frankly, that we would see inflation moving up in a persistent way that would actually move inflation expectations up while there was still significant slack in the labor market. I won’t say that it’s impossible, but it, it seems—it seems unlikely. It’s much more likely that we would—having achieved maximum employment conditions—we’d also be seeing 2 percent inflation and be on track to see inflation moving above 2 percent. They tend to move together. So that’s not to say inflation won’t—might not move up, but for inflation to move up in a persistent way that, that really starts to move inflation expectations up, that would have to—that would take some time. And you would think that, that it would be quite likely that, that we’d be in very strong labor markets for that to be happening. If it—if that actually were to happen, though, there is a—there’s a paragraph in the—in the Statement on Longer Run Goals and Monetary Policy Strategy which says that when the two goals are somewhat in conflict, we weigh various factors, including the, the time it would take to get back and [so] forth. So we do—it doesn’t really tell you what to do, but it tells you that we will weigh those two factors and how far we are away from them and how long it would take to reach them were we to reach that sort of pretty unlikely state. . Yes. We, we really have—just articulated the goals that I’ve—that I’ve just mentioned a couple of times, which is substantial further progress toward our goals before we taper. Now, that’s very likely—for us to achieve that, it’s very likely going to be the case that we’ve also made really significant progress on controlling the virus through vaccination and, and other—it, it—you know, those two things should more or less coexist. We haven’t articulated a separate test for a state of the virus that we’d like to achieve because we’re not—you know, we’re not experts in that area. We’re, we’re really focused on the economic outcomes, and, again, my, my guess is that we—it’s very likely, it seems to me, that for us to achieve the economic outcomes, we would need to taper or to raise interest rates. We would also have to have made very substantial progress in getting the virus under control—not, not necessarily fully under control. There is a, a possibility, of course, that we will, will have ongoing outbreaks over the summer and various regional outbreaks and potentially next winter as well. But we’ll be looking for substantial progress toward our goal—substantial further progress toward our goals as we think about tapering asset purchases. . So I would say that we were very worried about scarring, both in the labor market from people being out of—out of the labor market for an extended period of time. The evidence is clear that it becomes much more difficult if you’re out for a long time to get back in and get back to the life that you had. Same thing with these small businesses, many of which are the work of generations. Were we going to wipe out many of those unnecessarily? That was a big concern. I would say that, so far, you know, here we are in late April of 2021. We haven’t experienced that level of scarring either in the labor market or among smaller businesses. So we’re not living that, that downside case that we were very concerned about a year ago. Notwithstanding that, we’re a long way from full employment. We’re—you know, payroll jobs are 8.4 million below where they were in February of 2020. We’ve got a long ways to go. And also, it’s going to be a different economy. So we’ve been hearing a lot from companies that they are—they’ve been looking at deploying better technology and perhaps fewer people, including in some of the service industries that have been employing a lot of people. You know, it, it may well be—it seems quite likely that a number of the people who, who had those service sector jobs will struggle to find the same job and may need time to find work and get back to the working life they had. These were people who were working in February of 2020. They clearly want to work. So those people are going to need—they’re going to need help. And so, while I would say we haven’t seen really highly elevated levels of unemployment for—you know, up in the teens that we thought we might have for an extended period of time, we’ve still got a lot of people who are out to—out of work. We want to get them back to work as quickly as possible, and that’s really one of the things we’re trying to achieve with our policy. . So we do monitor the housing market very carefully, of course. And I would say that, before the pandemic, it’s a very different housing market than it was before the Global Financial Crisis. And one of the main differences was that households were in very good shape financially compared to where they were. In addition, most people who got mortgages were people with pretty high credit scores. There wasn’t the subprime—you know, low doc, no doc lending practices were not there. So we don’t have that kind of thing where we have a housing bubble where people are overlevered and owning a lot of houses. There’s no question, though, that housing prices are going up, and so we’re watching that carefully. It’s, it’s partly because there’s, there’s clearly strong demand, and there’s just not a lot of supply right now. So builders are, you know, struggling to keep up with the demand, clearly. Inventories are tremendously low. We’re, we’re all hearing those stories. And if you’re—if you’re an entry level housing buyer, this is—this is a problem, because it just is going to be that much harder for people to get that first house, and that’s a problem. I mean, we—it’s part of a strong economy, with people having money to spend and wanting to invest in housing. So, in that sense, it’s good. It’s clearly the strongest housing market that we’ve seen since the Global Financial Crisis. And, you know, my hope would be that, over time, housing builders can react to this demand and, and come up with more supply and workers will come back to work in that industry. So, you know, it is—it’s not an unalloyed good to have prices going up this much, and we’re watching it very carefully. I don’t see the kind of financial stability current concerns, though, that really do reside around the housing sector. So many of the financial crackups in all countries, all western countries, that have happened in the last 30 years have been around housing. We don’t—we really don’t see that here. We don’t see bad loans and unsustainable prices and that kind of thing. . Chris, you were breaking up a little there, but I think I did get your question. So I think there are a number of—a number of things going on there: the tension between a high level of unemployment and yet many, many companies saying they can’t find— an elevated number of companies saying that they can’t find workers. So, what’s really going on there? It, it should be a number of different things. There are workers who don’t actually have the specific skills that the employers are looking for. There may be geographical differences. It, it may also be that, for example, there—one big factor would be, schools aren’t open yet, so there are still people who are at home taking care of their children and would like to be back in the workforce but can’t be yet. There are people afraid of—there are virus fears that are weighing on people, so some—some people don’t want to go back to work. There are also a significant number of people who say they’ve retired—a large number of people that say that they’re retired. Now, it’s hard to say whether they will come back in as the labor market strengthens and as COVID, you know, becomes a—in the rearview mirror, in the history books, if you will. So—but clearly there’s something going, going on out there, as, as many companies are reporting labor shortages. We don’t see wages moving up yet, and presumably we would see that in a real—you know, in a really tight labor market. And we may well start to see that. I do think—so what will happen—what we saw during the last expansion, and it may be a different expansion, we don’t know, but, but what we saw was that labor supply generally showed up. In other words, if you were worried about there—about running out of workers, it seemed like we never did. You know, labor force participation held up. People came in the labor force. They stayed in the labor force longer than expected. So my guess would be that you will see people coming back into the labor force, and these jobs will be—the labor market will reach equilibrium. Maybe pay will go up. But I do think that—and I do think also that unemployment insurance benefits will run out in September, so to the extent that’s a factor, which is not clear, it will no longer be a factor fairly soon. So my guess is, it will come back to this economy where we have, you know, equilibrium between labor supply and labor demand. It may take some months, though. . Thanks for your question. So I actually have a couple things I’d like to say about inflation, including addressing your question. So let me start with just saying that we’re very strongly committed to achieving our objectives of maximum employment and price stability. Our, our price stability goal is 2 percent inflation over the longer run, and we believe that having inflation average 2 percent over time will help anchor long term inflation expectations at 2 percent. With inflation having run persistently below 2 percent for some time, the Committee seeks inflation moderately above inflation for two times—above 2 percent for some time. So, with a, a little bit of context, we’re, we’re making our way through an unprecedented series of events, really, in which a synchronized global shutdown is now giving way to widespread reopening of economies in many places around the world. In the United States, fiscal and monetary policy continue to provide strong support: Vaccinations are now widespread, and the economy is beginning to move ahead with real momentum. During this time of reopening, we are likely to see some upward pressure on prices, and I’ll discuss why. But those pressures are likely to be temporary as they are associated with the reopening process. In an episode of one time price increases as the economy reopens is not the same thing as, and is not likely to lead to, persistently higher year over year inflation into the future— inflation at levels that are not consistent with our goal of 2 percent inflation over time. Indeed, it is the Fed’s job to make sure that that does not happen. If, if, contrary to expectations, inflation were to move persistently and materially above 2 percent in a manner that threatened to move longer term inflation expectations materially above 2 percent, we would use our tools to bring inflation and expectations down to mandate consistent levels. And I would say, if I may, that is a principal difference from—we’re all very familiar at the Fed with the history of the 1960s and ’70s, of course. And we know that our job is to achieve 2 percent inflation over time. We’re committed to that, and we will use our tools to do that. So that’s a very different situation than you had back in the 1960s—or many, many differences, actually. So let me talk quickly about the two reasons—two, or you could say three, but really two main reasons why we think inflation will move up in the near term. The first is the base effects. Twelve month measures of inflation are likely to move well above 2 percent over the next few months as the very low inflation readings recorded in March and April of last year drop out of the calculation. That process has already started to show up. You saw it in the March CPI reading, and you’ll see it later this week in the PCE price data. These base effects will contribute about 1 percentage point to headline inflation and about 0.7 percentage point to core inflation in April and May. So, significant increases, and they’ll disappear over the following months. And they’ll be transitory. They carry no implication for the rate of inflation in later periods. So that’s base effects. The other big one I would talk about is bottlenecks. So this is what we’re seeing in supply chains in various industries, and we’re, we’re in close touch with all of these industries. You know, the Fed has a network of contacts that is unequaled in businesses and in nonprofits for that matter, too. So what do we mean by a bottleneck? A bottleneck really is a temporary blockage or restriction in the supply chain for, for a particular good or goods, something that slows down the process of producing goods and delivering them to the market. We think of bottlenecks as things that, in their nature, will be resolved as workers and businesses adapt, and we think of them as not calling for a change in monetary policy since they’re temporary and expected to resolve themselves. We know that the base effects will disappear in a few months. It’s much harder to predict with confidence the amount of time it will take to resolve the bottlenecks, or for that matter, the temporary effects that they will have on prices in the meantime. So, you know, I’ll just sum up and say, we understand our job. We will do our job. And we are, we are focused—as you’ve seen, for many years, we’ve been focused on inflation deviating below 2 percent, and we used our tools aggressively to keep it back up at 2 percent. If, if we see inflation moving materially above 2 percent in a persistent way that risks inflation expectations drifting up, then we will use our tools to guide inflation and expectations back down to 2 percent. No one should doubt that we will do that. This is not what we expect. But no one should doubt that, in the event, we would be prepared to use our tools. . So, what is “a string”? What do I mean by “a string”? Well, I would say, what we have right now is one really good—I can tell you what it’s not. It’s not one really good employment reading, which is what we got in March. We got close to a million jobs in March and a very strong labor market reading. And I was just suggesting that we’d want to see more like that. We’re 8½ million jobs below where we were in February of 2020, and that doesn’t account for growth in the labor force and growth in the economy, that trend we were on. So we have—we’re a long way from our, our goals. And we don’t have to get all the way to our goals to taper asset purchases, we just need to make substantial further progress. It’s going to take some time. On, on “largely,” there are a bunch of factors. I was really thinking—we were thinking of the base effects and also the energy effects. I wasn’t meaning to say there are some real effects. I mean, there are always—there are always relative prices going up and down within inflation. You know, there’s a basket for CPI or PCE. There are, you know, many, many, many factors that go into it. Relative prices are always moving up and down. This, this—we think it’s, it’s very fair to say that the increases we see and, frankly, are about to see later this week are largely due to base effects. It would have been more contentious to say “entirely due to base effects” because there are some things that are always going up, and so we just said “largely.” . We’re, we, we supervise banks to make sure that they have risk  management systems in place so that they can spot these things. We don’t manage their companies for them or, or try to manage individual risks. In the grand scheme of these large institutions, the Archegos risks were not systemically important or were not of the size that they would have really created trouble for any of those institutions. What was troubling, though, was that this could happen in a business for a number of firms that is thought to be—to carry relatively well understood risks. The prime brokerage business is, is a well understood business, and so it was surprising that a number of them would have had this. And it was essentially, I believe, the fact that, that they had the same big risk position on with a number of firms, and they weren’t—some of the firms were not aware that there were other firms that had those things. I, I wouldn’t say it’s in any way an indictment of our supervision of these firms. It, it—in some cases, it may be they were—it seems as though there were risk management breakdowns at some of the firms, not all of them. And that’s what we’re looking into. . You know, frankly, yes. I have not had a chance to do it yet, but I’ve been very busy, but I will visit. I don’t want to visit it at a time of a lot of media attention, because I don’t want that to be part of the story. But I will—I will go visit when, when it’s no longer a, a news story. And I—you know, I—I’ve met with homeless people many times, a number of times, anyway, let’s say. And I, I think it’s always good to talk to people and hear what’s going on in their lives. What you find out is, they’re you. They’re just us. I mean, they’re, they’re—these are people who, in many cases, had jobs and, you know, they have lives, and they’ve just, they’ve just found themselves in this place. It’s, it’s a—it’s a difficult problem, though. You know, there are many, many facets of it, and I’m well aware that this is not something that the Fed has all the tools for or anything like that. But I, I will do that when, when the need arises and when, when it’s not so much, you know, in the public eye. . Not really. I mean, I, I think I know what I’ll find there. I, I think you, you connect with these people and what you—again, what you find is, they’re like you. That could be you. I mean, that could be your sister. That could be, you know, your kid. You, you always feel that way in that sort of an encounter, and, you know, it just is a—it’s a—it’s an important thing to engage in, I think. And I think, you know, we bring that understanding into our lives and, frankly, into our work—the work that we do as well. . Right. So I think the first thing to say is that we feel an obligation to understand the technology and all of the policy issues very, very well. Central bank digital currencies are now possible, and we’re going to see some of them around the world. And we need to understand whether that’s something that would be a good thing for the people that we serve. How would it work in our system? And there are some very, very difficult questions to answer, but I think we—and we are engaged in a serious program to understand both the technology and the policy issues. I am—I would say this: We’re the world’s reserve currency, and that means that the dollar is used in transactions all around the world, far more than any other currency. And that’s because of our rule of law  our democratic institutions, which are the best in the world  our economy  our industrious people  all the things that make the United States the United States. That’s why we’re the, the reserve currency. And, of course, we have open capital accounts, which is essential if you’re going to be the reserve currency. So those are the factors that make us the reserve currency. I am—I’m less concerned that someone—that another country might have a digital currency first. You know, ask yourself the question, does that mean that, if you were a company that’s doing international business, would you then suddenly start to use that currency to use your—do your international transactions, or would you still do them in dollars, where, where— which is what everyone does? And I’m not so concerned about, about that. I am really concerned about getting it right. It is—it is a—it is a tricky set of questions that we have to navigate in a world where we already have, remember, a highly evolved payment system. We have FedNow and other immediately available funds. Pretty soon everybody will be able to, to do what people do in other parts of the world, which is just use their phone to make immediately available payments all the time. It’ll be normal. And what would be the role of a central bank digital currency in that kind of an environment? Far more important to get it right than it is to do it fast or feel that we need to rush to reach conclusions because other countries are moving ahead. I mean, that—what the China—the currency that’s being used in China is not one that would—that would work here. It’s, it’s one that really allows the government to see every payment that’s used—for which it is used in real time. It’s much more to do with things that are happening within their own financial system than it is, I think, to do with, with the global—you know, sort of global competition. . Right. Inflation expectations before the pandemic hit—and here we think of survey, market based—survey being either households or, or economists and, and market based. You look at all of those, and I would say that they were at the low end of what would have been consistent with a 2 percent inflation target, particularly our 2 percent inflation target, which calls for 2 percent average inflation. So they’re at the low end. Inflation expectations actually went down a bit at the beginning of the pandemic, and now they’ve just moved back up to levels broadly—that, that are where they were in 2018, or in some cases 2014, and, I would say, more consistent with our mandate. And we want them to be—we want them to be higher and—you know, on a persistent basis. We want inflation to run a little bit higher than it has been running for the last quarter of a century. We want it to average 2 percent, not 1.7 percent. And for that, we need to see inflation expectations that are consistent with that, really well anchored at 2 percent. We don’t really see that yet, but I would say that, that, you know, breakevens have moved up, in a way. Breakevens are based on CPI, of course, but they’re, they’re now at levels that are—that are pretty close to mandate consistent, whereas before, they were below. We monitor inflation expectations very, very carefully, as you would obviously know. So that’s where—that’s where I would say it is. . It doesn’t work that way. You know, we’re, we’re—inflation measures are always going to be a bit volatile. We expect—as I mentioned, we expect core and, and headline PCE to move up because of base effects, and—you know, I—and we expect that to go away. We, we also expect these, these bottleneck effects to come in. We don’t know how persistent they’ll be. We, we think they’ll—you know, it’s a matter of, of when they will pass through, not whether they will pass through. But we can’t be confident about the exact timing of that or the size of them. They don’t seem especially large at the moment, but, you know, we, we don’t know. I mean, you know, this is—this is all about the reopening of the economy. That’s what’s happening. We had it—we were in a deep, deep hole a year ago, and now, with a lot of help from fiscal policy, some additional help from monetary policy, and, you know, a great deal of help from vaccination, we’re seeing a strong rebound in activity. And what’s happening is, it’s, it’s—demand can be spurred with fiscal transfers and—the saved up fiscal transfers and, and people going back to work and things like that. The supply side will take a little bit of time to adapt. New restaurants will have to be opened. The supply of various inputs into the goods part of the economy will have to be brought back up to speed. And you—you’re seeing some of that. That’ll happen over a period of time, over coming quarters. You’ll see some of the bottlenecks resolved, but the last one may not be resolved for some time. . Right. So we look at—financial stability for us is really—we have a broad framework, so we don’t just jump from one thing to another. I know many people just look at asset prices, and they look at some of the things that are going on in the—in the equity markets, which, which I think do reflect froth in the equity markets. But really, it—really, we try to stick to a framework for financial stability so we can—so we can talk about it the same way each time and so we can be held accountable for it. So one of the areas is asset prices, and I would say some of the asset prices are high. You are seeing, seeing things in the capital markets that, that are—that are a bit frothy. That’s a fact. I won’t say it has nothing to do with monetary policy, but it also—it has a tremendous amount to do with vaccination and reopening of the economy. That’s really what has been moving markets a lot in the last few months is this turn away from what was a pretty dark winter to now a fast—a much faster vaccination process and a faster reopening. So that’s, that’s part of what’s going on. The other—the other things, though—you know, leverage in the financial system, is it— is, is not a problem. That’s a—that’s a—that was one of the four pillars. Asset prices was one. Leverage in the financial system is, is not an issue  we have very well capitalized large banks. We have funding risks for, for our largest financial institutions that are also very low. We do have some funding risk issues around money market funds, but I would say they’re not systemic right now. And, and the household sector is actually in pretty good shape. It was in—it was in a very good shape as a relative matter before the financial crisis—sorry, the pandemic crisis hit. There were real concerns, of course, with high levels of unemployment and loss of wages and all of that, that the—that the household sector would, would, would weaken dramatically. That hasn’t happened. So, with the fiscal transfers, money that’s on household balance sheets, they’re in good shape. You see relatively low defaults and that kind of thing. So the overall financial stability picture is mixed, but, on balance, it’s—you know, it’s manageable, I would say. And it’s—by the way, I think it’s appropriate and important for financial conditions to remain accommodative to support economic activity. Again, 8½ million people who had jobs in February don’t have them now, and, you know, there’s a long way to go until we reach our goal. So that’s what I would say. . Right. So the federal funds rate has been well within target and—at target range, and money market funds—money market conditions are, are fine. We have the ability to use our administrative tools to make sure that that remains the case. We do expect further downward pressure on, on rates through asset purchases and also the runoff in the—in the Treasury General Account. But, at this point, we didn’t see a need for—to, to deploy our tools to, to support rates. And, of course, we will do so if, if the need does arise. . So I think capital requirements for banks are, to me—went up tremendously, really, over the course of the 10 years between the financial crisis and the arrival of the pandemic. And the banks really made it through a real stress test very well and passed three, three of our—two of our stress tests, and that is another one that’s pending. So capital is, is in a good place, as far as I’m concerned, in the banking system. But, to your point, what we saw was—so what, what kind of happened during the pandemic crisis that, that requires attention, and number one is money market funds and corporate bond funds where we saw run dynamics again, and we need to—we’re, we’re looking at that. So we’re looking at ways, and people around the world are looking at ways, to make those vehicles resilient so that they don’t have to be, you know, supported by the government whenever there’s, you know, severely stressed market conditions. It’s a private business. They, they need to have the wherewithal to stay in business and not just count on the Fed and others to—around the world to come in. So that was that. The other one is Treasury market structure. Dealers are committing less capital to that activity now than they were 10 or 15 years ago, and the need for capital is higher because there’s so much more supply of Treasuries. And so there are some questions about Treasury market structure, and there’s a lot of careful work going on to understand whether there’s something we can do about this, because we—you know, the U.S. Treasury market is probably the most single important—single most important market in, in the economy and the world. It needs to be liquid. It needs to function well for the good of our economy and the good of our citizens. So it’s not clear what, what—where that takes you, but we, we are taking a careful look—and the Treasury Department is, is really going to be leading this—at, at Treasury market structure and all of the various aspects of that to make sure that we do have a resilient, strong Treasury market that can work even in difficult times. As, as you know, at the very beginning of the financial—of the—of this recent crisis, there was such a demand for selling Treasuries, including by foreign central banks, that, really, the dealers couldn’t handle the volume. And so what was happening was, the market was really starting to lose function, and that’s—that was a really serious problem which we had to solve through really massive asset purchases. And, you know, so we’d like to, we’d like to see if there isn’t something we can do to—is—do we need to build against that kind of an extreme tail risk, and if so, what would that look like? . When will the economy be, be able to stand on its own feet? I’m not sure if—I’m not sure what the exact nature of that question is. . Okay. Sorry. So we have—you know, we’ve articulated our test for that, as you know, and that is just, we’ll continue asset purchases at this pace until we see substantial further progress. And we’re, we’re going to communicate well in advance of any decision. We’re going to let, you know, the, the public know that that’s what we’re thinking. And, and so there’ll be a lot of warning and that kind of thing. But it’s about substantial further progress toward our goals. That’s, that’s really all it is. It doesn’t have any, any external, virus  related specific requirement, although, again, I do think it’ll—you know, the, the virus will need to continue to be controlled for us to achieve those economic goals. But it’s really the economic goals. Now, your second question. Sorry, just say again. I didn’t quite get that question. . So it’s really up to Congress. We—we’re not an adviser to Congress. You know, we don’t, we don’t weigh in on specific fiscal bills or proposals. That’s really between elected parties. You know, basically, fiscal policy is the province of people who stand for democratic election and win, and they get to make those very difficult decisions, and they get to be accountable to the voters. We didn’t do any of that, and we don’t have a seat at that table. We don’t seek a seat at that table. So that’s really something for Congress and the Administration to, to deal with. . Yes. I, I mean, we’re—we started buying MBS because the mortgage backed security market was, was really experiencing severe dysfunction, and we’ve sort of, sort of articulated, you know, what our exit path is from that. It’s not meant to provide direct assistance to, to the housing market. That was never the intent. It was really just to keep that as—it’s a very close relation to the Treasury market and a very important market on its own. And so that’s, that’s why we, we bought as we did during the Global Financial Crisis  we bought MBS too. Again, not, not an intention to send help to the housing market, which was, which was really not, not a problem this time at all. So—and, you know, it’s, it’s a situation where we will, we will taper asset purchases when the time comes to do that, and those, those purchases will come to zero over time. And that time is not yet. . So it’s really not more complicated than this. We, we articulated the “substantial further progress” test at our December meeting. And, really, for the next couple of months, we made relatively little progress toward our goals. And, remember, substantial further progress from December—from our December meeting. And then vaccination started to get more widespread. The economy reopened. We got a really nice job report for March. It doesn’t constitute substantial further progress. It’s not close to substantial further progress. We’re hopeful that we will see along this path a way to that goal. And we believe we will  it just is a question of when. And so, when that time—when the time comes for us to talk about talking about it, we’ll do that. And—but that time is not now. It’s—we’re just not—we’re not that far. We’ve had one great jobs report. It’s not enough. You know, we’re going to act on actual data, not on our forecast. And we’re just going to need to see more data. That’s—it’s no, no more complicated than that. . If we bought less? You’re, you’re very faint. So if someone has the volume, they can turn it up. But if we bought less, you know, no. I mean, I think the effect is proportional to the amount we buy. It’s, it’s really part of overall accommodative financial conditions. We, we have tried to create accommodative financial conditions to support economic activity, and we did that. And we articulated the—you know, the, the tests for withdrawing that accommodation. And we think, you know—so we’re waiting to see those tests to be fulfilled both for asset purchases and for liftoff of rates. And, you know, when the tests are fulfilled, we’ll, we’ll go ahead. As we—you know, we’ve done this before. We did it in, in the last—after the last crisis, and, you know, we’ll do it in, in maybe—we’ll do it—as those tests are satisfied, we’ll do it. And the—and the only thing that will guide us is, are the tests met? You know, that, that’s what we focused on: Is—have, have the macroeconomic conditions that we’ve articulated, have they been realized? That will be the test for, for tapering asset purchases and for raising interest rates. . Thank you.

****FOMCpresconf20210616

. Good afternoon. At the Federal Reserve, we are strongly committed to achieving the monetary policy goals that Congress has given us: maximum employment and price stability. Today the Federal Open Market Committee kept interest rates near zero and maintained our asset purchases. These measures, along with our strong guidance on interest rates and on our balance sheet, will ensure that monetary policy will continue to deliver powerful support to the economy until the recovery is complete. Widespread vaccinations, along with unprecedented fiscal policy actions, are also providing strong support to the recovery. Indicators of economic activity and employment have continued to strengthen, and real GDP this year appears to be on track to post its fastest rate of increase in decades. Much of this rapid growth reflects the continued bounceback in activity from depressed levels. The sectors most adversely affected by the pandemic remain weak but have shown improvement. Household spending is rising at a rapid pace, boosted by the ongoing reopening of the economy, fiscal support, and accommodative financial conditions. The housing sector is strong, and business investment is increasing at a solid pace. In some industries, near  term supply constraints are restraining activity. Forecasts from FOMC participants for economic growth this year have been revised up since our March Summary of Economic Projections. Even so, the recovery is incomplete, and risks to the economic outlook remain. As with overall economic activity, conditions in the labor market have continued to improve, although the pace of improvement has been uneven. Employment rose 419,000 per month, on average, in April and May, with the leisure and hospitality sector continuing to post notable gains. Employment in this sector and the economy as a whole remains well below pre  pandemic levels. The unemployment rate remained elevated in May at 5.8 percent, and this figure understates the shortfall in employment, particularly as participation in the labor market has not moved up from the low rates that have prevailed for most of the past year. Factors related to the pandemic, such as caregiving needs, ongoing fears of the virus, and unemployment insurance payments, appear to be weighing on employment growth. These factors should wane in coming months against a backdrop of rising vaccinations, leading to more rapid gains in employment. Looking ahead, FOMC participants project the labor market to continue to improve, with the median projection for the unemployment rate standing at 4.5 percent at the end of this year and declining to 3.5 percent by the end of 2023. The economic downturn has not fallen equally on all Americans, and those least able to shoulder the burden have been hardest hit. In particular, despite progress, joblessness continues to fall disproportionately on lower wage workers in the service sector and on African Americans and Hispanics. Inflation has increased notably in recent months. The 12 month change in PCE prices was 3.6 percent in April and will likely remain elevated in coming months before moderating. Part of the increase reflects the very low readings from early in the pandemic falling out of the calculation as well as the pass through of past increases in oil prices to, to consumer energy prices. Beyond these effects, we are also seeing upward pressure on prices from the rebound in spending as the economy continues to reopen, particularly as supply bottlenecks have limited how quickly production in some sectors can respond in the near term. These bottleneck effects have been larger than anticipated, and FOMC participants have revised up their projections for, for inflation notably for this year. As these transitory supply effects abate, inflation is expected to drop back toward our longer run goal, and the median inflation projection falls from 3.4 percent this year to 2.1 percent next year and 2.2 percent in 2023. The process of reopening the economy is unprecedented, as was the shutdown at the onset of the pandemic. As the reopening continues, shifts in demand can be large and rapid, and bottlenecks, hiring difficulties, and other constraints could continue to limit how quickly supply can adjust, raising the possibility that inflation could turn out to be higher and more persistent than we expect. Our new framework for monetary policy emphasizes the importance of having well anchored inflation expectations, both to foster price stability and to enhance our ability to promote our broad based and inclusive maximum employment goal. Indicators of longer term inflation expectations have generally reversed the declines seen earlier in the pandemic and have moved into a range that appears broadly consistent with our longer run inflation goal of 2 percent. If we saw signs that the path of inflation or longer term inflation expectations were moving materially and persistently beyond levels consistent with our goal, we’d be prepared to adjust the stance of monetary policy. The pandemic continues to pose risks to the economic outlook. Progress on vaccinations has limited the spread of COVID 19 and will likely continue to reduce the effects of the public health crisis on the economy. However, the pace of vaccinations has slowed, and new strains of the virus remain a risk. Continued progress on vaccinations will support a return to more normal economic conditions. The Fed’s policy actions have been guided by our mandate to promote maximum employment and stable prices for the American people, along with our responsibilities to promote the stability of the financial system. As the Committee reiterated in today’s policy statement, with inflation having run persistently below 2 percent, we will aim to achieve inflation moderately above 2 percent for some time so that inflation averages 2 percent over time and longer term inflation expectations remain well anchored at 2 percent. We expect to maintain an accommodative stance of monetary policy until these employment and inflation outcomes are achieved. With regard to interest rates, we continue to expect that it will be appropriate to maintain the current 0 to ¼ percent target range for the federal funds rate until labor market conditions have reached levels consistent with the Committee’s assessment of maximum employment and inflation has risen to 2 percent and is on track to moderately exceed 2 percent for some time. As is evident in the SEP, many participants forecast that these favorable economic conditions will be met somewhat sooner than previously projected  the median projection for the appropriate level of the federal funds rate now lies above the effective lower bound in 2023. Of course, these projections do not represent a Committee decision or plan, and no one knows with any certainty where the economy will be a couple of years from now. More important than any forecast is the fact that, whenever liftoff comes, policy will remain highly accommodative. Reaching the conditions for liftoff will mainly signal that the recovery is strong and no longer requires holding rates near zero. In addition, we are continuing to increase—continuing to increase our holdings of Treasury securities by at least $80 billion per month and of agency mortgage backed securities by at least $40 billion per month until substantial further progress has been made toward our maximum employment and price stability goals. The increase in our balance sheet since March 2020 has materially eased financial conditions and is providing substantial support to the economy. At our meeting that concluded earlier today, the Committee had a discussion on the progress made toward our goals since the Committee adopted its asset purchase guidance last December. While reaching the standard of “substantial further progress” is still a ways off, participants expect that progress will continue. In coming meetings, the Committee will continue to assess the economy’s progress toward our goals. As we have said, we will provide advance notice before announcing any decision to make changes to our purchases. On a final note, we made a technical adjustment today to the Federal Reserve’s administered rates. The IOER and overnight RRP rates were adjusted upward by 5 basis points in order to keep the federal funds rate well within the target range and to support smooth functioning in money markets. This technical adjustment has no bearing on the appropriate path for the federal funds rate or stance of monetary policy. To conclude, we understand that our actions affect communities, families, and businesses across the country. Everything we do is in service to our public mission. We at the Fed will do everything we can to support the economy for as long as it takes to complete the recovery. Thank you. I look forward to your questions. . Thank you. So I would say, if you look at the labor market and you look at the demand for workers and the level of job creation and think ahead, I think it’s clear, and I am confident, that we are on a path to a very strong labor market—a labor market that, that shows low unemployment, high participation, rising wages for people across the spectrum. I mean, I think that’s, that’s shown in our projections, it’s shown in outside projections. And if you look through the current time frame and think one and two years out, we’re going to be looking at a very, very strong labor market. In terms of exactly what that means, we’ll, we’ll have to see how things evolve. I think we learned during the course of the last very long expansion, the longest in our history, that labor supply during a long expansion can exceed expectations, can move above its estimated trend. And, and I have no reason to think that that won’t happen again. At the same time, we have seen—in terms of participation, we’ve seen a significant number of, of people retire. And so we, we don’t actually know exactly what labor force participation will be as we go forward, but I, I would tend to, to look at it and think that it—that it can return to high levels, although it may take some time to do that. But overall, this is—this is going to be, you know, a very strong labor market. In terms of the near term, you ask as well—so we see a couple of things, a few things that seem likely to be holding back labor supply. There are very large amounts of job openings, and there are a very large number of people who, who are unemployed. And the pace of, of filling those jobs is—somehow feels slower than it might be. So I’d point to a number of things, the first of which is just that most of the, the act of sort of going back to one’s old job—that’s kind of already happened. So this is a question of people finding a new job. And that’s just a process that takes longer. There may be something of a speed limit on it. You’ve got to find a job where, where your skills match what, you know, what, what the employer wants. It’s got to be in the right area. There’s just a lot that goes into the function of finding a job. So that’s, that’s sort of a natural thing. In addition, I would say that we, we look at, for example, a, a significant number of people still say that they’re concerned about going back to work in jobs where there’s a lot of public facing because of—because of COVID. So that’s clearly holding back some people, and that should diminish as vaccinations move ahead. There’s also the question of childcare. Many are engaged in, in caretaking. And as schools reopen and, and, and childcare/daycare centers open in the fall—in the fall, then we should see—we should see that supporting labor force participation by caretakers. Finally, unemployment insurance for something like 15 million people will either end or be diminished as we move through the summer and into, into, into the fall by the end of September, and I’d like some—that may also encourage some to go back in and take jobs. So you would think that that would add to an increase in job creation as well. So you put all those together, I would expect that we would see strong job creation building up over the summer and going into—going into the fall. I will also say, though, the last thing I’ll say is, this is an extraordinarily unusual time. And we, we really don’t have a template or, or, you know, any experience of, of a situation like this. And so I think we have to be humble about our ability to understand the data. It’s not a time to try to reach hard conclusions about the labor market, about inflation, about the path of policy. We need to see more data. We need to be a little bit patient. And I do think, though, that we’ll, we’ll, we’ll be seeing some things coming up in coming months that will—that will inform our, our thinking. . So inflation has come in above expectations over the last few months. But if you look behind the headline numbers, you’ll see that the incoming data are, are consistent with the view that prices—that prices that are driving that higher inflation are from categories that are being directly affected by the recovery from the pandemic and the reopening of the economy. So, for example, the experience with, with lumber prices is, is illustrative of this. The thought is that prices like that that have moved up really quickly because of the shortages and bottlenecks and the like, they should stop going up, and at some point, they, they, in some cases, should actually go down. And we did see that in the case of lumber. Another example where we haven’t seen that yet is prices for used cars, which accounted for more than a third of the total increase in core inflation. Used car prices are going up because of sort of a perfect storm of very strong demand and limited supply. It’s going up at just an amazing annual rate. But we do think that it makes sense that that would stop, and that in fact it would reverse over time. So we think we’ll be seeing some of that. When will we be seeing it? We’re not sure. That narrative seems, still seems quite likely to prove correct, although, you know, as I pointed out at the last press conference, the, the timing of that is, is pretty uncertain, and so are the, the effects in the near term. But over time, it seems likely that these very specific things that are driving up inflation will be—will be temporary. And we’ll be, you know, we’re going to be looking. We’ll be looking at the monthly pricing data. I’ll, I’ll also say that the labor market is going to be important, both for the maximum  employment goal, but also for inflation. And we’ll be looking at that. And, and as I—as I mentioned, we expect and I expect that we’ll see increases in supply over coming months as the factors that we believe have been suppressing supply abate, wane, move down. So I, I can’t give you an exact number or an exact time, but I would say that we do expect inflation to move down. If you look at the—if you look at the forecast for 2021 and—sorry, 2022 and 2023 among my colleagues on the, on the Federal Open Market Committee, you will see that people do expect inflation to move down meaningfully toward our goal. And I think the full range of, of, of inflation projections for 2023 falls between 2 and 2.3 percent, which is consistent with our—with our goals. . Right. So I, I expect that we’ll be able to say more about timing as we see more data. Basically, there’s not a lot of more light I can—I can shed on that. But you can think of this meeting that we had as the “talking about talking about” meeting, if you like. And I now suggest that we retire that term, which has—which has served its purpose well, I think. So Committee participants were of the view that since we adopted that guidance in December, the economy has clearly made progress, although we are still a ways from our goal of substantial further progress. Participants expect continued progress ahead toward that objective. And assuming that is the case, it will be appropriate to consider announcing a plan for reducing our asset purchases at a future meeting. So at coming meetings, the Committee will continue to assess the economy’s progress toward our goals, and we’ll give advance notice before announcing any decision. The timing, of course, Ylan, will depend on the pace of that progress and not on any calendar. . So we, we do tend to look at the longer term inflation expectations, because that’s really, we think, what matters for, for inflation. So and, and, you know, the shorter term ones do tend to move around based on, for example, gasoline prices. So you’ll see if gasoline prices were to spike, you’ll see the shorter term inflation expectation measures, particularly the surveys, move up. And, and that’s, that’s maybe not a good signal for future inflation if, if gas happens to spike and then go back down again. So we—yes, I think if, if you look at the broad range of longer term inflation expectations, they’ve moved up. They moved down during the beginning of the pandemic, you know, sort of further exacerbating concerns that we might find ourselves where, for example, the ECB and the Bank of Japan have been, where you have expectations and inflation itself sliding down and you have a really hard time stopping that process once it begins. So that was a concern. So it’s, it’s good, actually, to see inflation—longer term inflation expectations move back up to a range—it’s a range that’s consistent with what our objectives are. These are not precise measures, and that’s—and they, they contain risk premiums of various kinds. And that’s why we look at a broad range of them and tend to look at the movement of that broad range of, of, of indicators, which are from, you know, surveys of economists, surveys of the public, and also market based. It’s, it’s, it’s a wide index, as I’m sure you know. We look at that, and we see them back in the range where they were. And, by the way, they’ve been broadly higher than that, somewhat modestly higher than that, not so many years ago, at a time when inflation was, was, was still anchored at around 2 percent or maybe even a little bit below. So the answer is, yes, I think they are anchored and they’re at a good place right now. It’s gratifying to see them having moved up off of their pandemic lows. And, you know, as you know, it’s, it’s fundamental in our framework, our new framework, to, to assure that inflation—longer term inflation expectations are anchored at a place that is consistent with our goal. We, we think that’s an important reason. If, if inflation expectations are not anchored at a place that’s consistent with your goal, it’s not clear why you would expect to hit your goal over the longer term. So it’s important. . On your first question, the judgment of when we have arrived at substantial further progress is one that the Committee will make. And it would not be appropriate for me to lay out particular numbers that do or do not—that do or do not qualify. That is—that is, you know, the process that we’re beginning now at the next meeting. We will begin, meeting by meeting, to, to assess that progress and talk about what we—what we think we’re seeing and, and just do all of the things that you do to sort of clarify your thinking around the process of deciding whether and how to adjust the pace and composition of asset purchases. In terms of the, the, the two hikes—so let me say a couple things first of all, not for the first time, about the—about the dot plot. These are, of course, individual projections. They’re not a Committee forecast, they’re not a plan. And we did not actually have a discussion of whether liftoff is appropriate at any particular year, because discussing liftoff now would be— would be highly premature, wouldn’t make any sense. If you look at the transcripts from five years ago, you’ll see that sometimes people mention their rate path in their interventions. Often they don’t. And the last thing to say is, the dots are not a great forecaster of, of future rate moves. And that’s not because—it’s just because it’s so highly uncertain. There is no great forecaster of, of future dots. So, so dots to be taken with a—with a big, big grain of salt. However, so let me talk about this, this, this meeting. The Committee spelled out, as you know, in our FOMC statements the conditions that it expects to see before an adjustment in the target range is made. And it’s outcome based, it’s not time based. And, as I mentioned, it’s labor market conditions consistent with maximum employment, inflation at 2 percent and on track to exceed 2 percent. In the projections, it gives some sense of how participants see the economy evolving in their most likely case. And, honestly, the main message I would take away from the SEP is that participants—many, many participants are more comfortable that the economic conditions in the Committee’s forward guidance will be met somewhat sooner than previously anticipated. And that would be a welcome development. If such outcomes materialize, it means the economy will have made faster progress toward our goals. So the other thing I’ll say is, rate increases are really not at all the focus of the Committee. The focus of the Committee is the current state of the economy. But in terms of our tools, it’s about asset purchases. That’s what we’re thinking about. Liftoff is, is well into the future. The conditions for liftoff—we’re very far from maximum employment, for example. It’s, it’s a consideration for the future. So the near term thing is really—the real near term discussion, discussion that will begin is really about the, the path of asset purchases. And, as I mentioned, we had a discussion about that today and expect to, in future meetings, continue to think about our progress. . So our intention for this process is that it will be orderly, methodical, and transparent. And I can just tell you, we, we, we see real value in communicating well in advance what our thinking is. And we’ll try to be clear. And, as I mentioned, we’ll, we’ll give advance notice before announcing a decision to taper. And so all I can say is that we, we think it’s important—we think where the balance sheet’s concerned, a lot of notice, as much transparency as we can give, and as far—as far in advance as we can to give people a chance to adjust their expectations. And, you know, we expect to be in that business until we reach substantial further progress and then have a—have a decision. Again, I have nothing further on time. It wouldn’t be appropriate to say. We’re going to have to see more data. We’re a ways away from substantial further progress, we think. But we’re making progress. . Again, as we—as we approach that goal, we’ll provide, you know, as much clarity as we can. . You know, so as part of our year and a half long process, the review that we did and came out with at the end of that with the—with the new Statement on Longer  Run Goals and Monetary Policy Strategy, we looked carefully at the idea. We’ve all read all the literature around different formulas for makeup and things like that. And we concluded—and, you know, I strongly agree—that it’s not wise to, to wed yourself to a particular formulation of that. So we did adopt a discretionary—there’s an element of discretion in it. You know, it says that we will seek to—seek inflation that runs moderately above 2 percent for some time. And it’s, it’s meant to create a broad sense that we want inflation to average 2 percent over time. And that under the old—under the old formula, under the old framework, what was happening was, 2 percent was a ceiling because all of the errors were below. You were always getting back to 2 percent. So you were bouncing back and forth between 1½ and 2, and we wanted them to be centered around 2. So, so that’s, that’s the approach that we’re taking. And you’re right, it’s not—it’s not a formulaic approach. We were clear on that when we announced the framework. Was there another part of your question, Craig? . So on the—on the facility, we think it’s doing its job. We think it’s doing—the reverse repo facility is, is doing what it’s supposed to do, which is to provide a floor under money market rates and keep the federal funds rate well within its—well within its range. So we’re not concerned with it. It’s doing—you have an unusual situation where the Treasury General Account is, is shrinking and bill supply is shrinking. And so there’s, there’s downward pressure—we’re buying assets—there’s downward pressure on short term rates, and that facility is, is doing what we think it’s supposed to do. Sorry, your second question was again? . It could have some impact. I think we’ll have to see empirically. But it’s designed to keep the federal funds rate, you know, within the range. And I do think it could have some effect on, on broader money market conditions below as it relates to, you know, the very low rates and the downward pressures. . It’s not, honestly. And, you know, the funny thing, you would think that it would, but we’ll have to see. It’s, it’s possible that that would not be the case. That’s going to be an empirical question. . Yeah. As, as you well know, there isn’t one indicator we can look to, and there’s no one number that we can therefore point to. We look at a range of indicators, and it’s a very broad range, you can count to a high number just quickly—but, but, certainly, it will include things like unemployment and participation and wages and many different flavors of that. So how do we think about it? A couple of things. We’re all going to be informed by what we saw in the last cycle, which was labor supply outperforming expectations over a long period of time. Now, that hadn’t happened in many other cycles, but this was a very long cycle. So we’re going to have to be alert to see whether that can happen again. It is a different—it’s a different economy. We, we have had a slew of retirements, and that may weigh on participation. That, that effect, though, should wear off in a few years and, and, you know, as you move through that window, because they would have—people would have retired anyway, and you’ll be back where you, you would have been. So I think we’re—I think that lesson number one is, is just to be careful about assessing maximum employment. And I think if you—during the last cycle, there were—there were waves of concern that we were reaching full employment as early, you know, as, as 2012, when I arrived at the Fed. And, you know—you know, nine years later— eight years later, we were still creating jobs. And, you know, it was quite remarkable. So we’re all going to be informed by that. At the same time, we understand this is a different economy. You know, the, the demographics are, people are getting older, and that should have a secular effect of, of reducing participation over time. So we have to be sensible about what, what can be done. But I think we’re going to be—we’re going to lean into that and be optimistic. You asked about wages. You know, we’re seeing wage increases. That’s, that’s sort of a natural thing to be seeing in a strong economy. And what we’re seeing is—we don’t see anything that’s troubling in the sense of—what would be troubling would be, you know, very wide across the economy, wages at unsustainable levels without high inflation. In other words, wages in excess of productivity and inflation, you know, by a meaningful amount broadly across the economy, sort of forcing companies to keep raising prices and getting into a wage–price cycle. That’s, that’s the old formula for—one of the old formulas for having high inflation. We don’t see anything like that now. We do see high wages. We see them for, for people who are mostly new, you know, entering into new jobs, many of them in low skilled jobs. And, but we, we do think—you’ve got to—you’ve got to think in the labor market right now, where, where supply and demand are just not matched up well. And, you know, we think it’s a flexible economy and, and it will clear. There will—there will be a level at which supply and demand meet. And that’ll—we think that’ll, that’ll be happening in coming months. So—but the last thing I’ll say is, again, if you look at, at the forecasts, we are going to be in a very strong labor market pretty quickly here. There are still a big group of unemployed people. And, you know, we’re not going to forget about them. We’re going—we’re going to do everything we can to get people back into work and give them the chance to work. But there’s every reason to think that we’ll be in a—in a labor market with very attractive numbers, with low unemployment, high participation, and rising wages across the spectrum. So that’s, that’s a little bit how we’re looking at the—at the labor market. . What I can say is, we’re working on it. I don’t have anything to share with you in terms of the particulars or the timing right now, unfortunately. But we’ve, we’ve always—our position has been for a long time and, and it is now that we’d, we’d like the leverage ratio to be a backstop to risk based capital requirements. When leverage requirements are, are, are binding, it does skew incentives for firms to substitute lower risk assets for high risk ones. It’s a straightforward thing. And because of the substantial increase in reserves, Treasuries, and other safe assets in the banking system, the SLR is rapidly ceasing to become— ceasing to be the intended backstop for big firms that we want it to be. So we do think it’s appropriate to consider ways to adapt it to this new high reserves environment, and, and we’re looking hard at the issue. We would also, just to be really clear, we will take whatever actions are necessary to assure that any changes we do make or recommend do not erode the overall strength of bank capital requirements. Sorry, I can’t give you any more. That’s just something we’re working on. . Well, that is really not the problem we’re having right now. But— and, actually, people who work in commodity industries are very focused on that, because they know that, you know, they don’t want to build, build capacity and then find out that it’s not necessary. So, really, the problem now is, is that demand is very, very strong. Incomes are high, people have money in their bank accounts. Demand for goods is extremely high, and it hasn’t— it hasn’t come down. We’re seeing the service sector reopening. And so you’re seeing prices are moving back up off their lows there. But in terms of, of overcorrecting, I mean, I think there, there is a possibility on the other side of this that, that inflation could be—could actually be quite low going forward. But that’s not—that’s not really where our focus is right now. Our focus right now is, we need to—our, our expectation is that these, these high inflation readings that we’re seeing now will start to abate. And that’s, that’s what we think. And it’ll be like the lumber experience, and like we expect the used car experience to be. With things like airplane tickets and hotels, which are the other two factors in the most recent CPI report that went up a lot, we expect that those prices will get back up to where they were, but there’s no reason to think that they’re going to keep going up a lot. Because if they are, people will build new hotels. There’s no reason for supply and demand to be out of whack in the hotel business over any period of time. So we think that’ll happen. I think in terms of the timing and the effects on inflation in the near term, there’s a lot of uncertainty. The overall story is one that, that we think is right, and we think the incoming data support it and, you know, so do many, many forecasters. And if you look at the forecasts on the FOMC, you will—you will see that as well. But we don’t—we don’t in any way dismiss the chance that it can work out that, that this goes on longer than expected. And the risk would be that over time, it does begin to affect inflation expectations. And if we see inflation expectations and inflation—or inflation moving up in a way that is really materially above what we—what we would see as consistent with our goals, and persistently so, we wouldn’t hesitate to use our tools to address that. Price stability is half of our mandate, and we would certainly do that. We do not expect that, though. That is not our base case. And, and in that we’re joined by many other forecasters, but there’s a lot to be humble about among forecasters. Forecasters have a lot to be humble about. It’s a—it’s a highly uncertain business. And we’re, we’re very much attuned to the risks and, and watching the data carefully. In the meantime, I would say, you know, we should—as I mentioned earlier, there’s so much uncertainty around this. It’s, it’s just a unique situation that we need to see how things evolve in coming months and, and see how that story holds up and act accordingly. . You know, it’s a—it’s a continuum, right? What you’ve seen with the pandemic is sharply declining cases, hospitalizations, and deaths. And that’s great. And, and, you know, that should continue. But, you know, you, you also saw in the United Kingdom, which has, I think, at least as high if not higher vaccination rates, they’ve had an outbreak of the Delta variety. And it’s—and it’s causing them to have to—to have to react to that. So you’re not—you’re not out of the woods at this point. And it would be premature to—in my thinking, it would be premature to declare victory. Vaccination still has a ways to go to get to levels—it would be good to see it get to a substantially higher level. And, you know, that can only help. So, look, I—but you’re right, the statement language is evolving. I would expect it to continue to evolve. There’s a lot of judgment in that. But you can expect us to drag our feet a little bit on that, because that’s what you do with statement language. It’s, it’s great to see the progress. But, again, I would not declare victory yet. I would say it is so great to see the reopening of the economy, though, and to see people out living their lives again. You know, who doesn’t want to see that? And it appears to be safe, and I just would encourage people to continue to get vaccinated. . I think it’s both. You know, I think, clearly, since March what’s happened is, people have grown more confident in these very strong outcomes, that they’ll be achieved. Very strong outcomes in the economy will be achieved. There’s, there’s more grounds for comfort. We’ve seen growth coming higher than we expected. We’ve seen very strong labor demand. We’ve also seen—we have seen inflation above target, though, and I think even though, you know, in, in our forecasters’ case, they do see inflation coming back down over ’22 and ’23 into, into areas that are very consistent with our—with our mandate. Nonetheless, the risk is, is something that can factor into people’s thinking about appropriate monetary policy. The thing is, you know, these are 18 different forecasts, and I can’t stand here and say exactly what was in all 18 people’s minds. But that, that is something that I think can factor into things as well—factor into our forecast as well. . So what we’re seeing in the near term—again, our base case is that what we’re seeing in the near term is, is principally associated with, with the reopening of the economy and not with a tight labor market or tight resource constraints, really. So—but you’re right. When, when you get to—in, in the forecast, all of that, you know, supply and demand sides of the economy adapt. We have a very highly adaptive, you know, flexible economy, more so than most. And by 2023, those increases are really about, about, you know, rising resource utilization or, to put it a different way, you know, low unemployment, or high employment is a way to think about it. So that’s what that’s about. That’s about the kind of broad inflationary pressure that results from, you know, a really strong expansion tightening up resource utilization across the whole economy and lifting, lifting up inflation. And that’s why—that’s why you would see it then, because by then, you know, in the forecast—and it’s just a forecast, they’re just individual forecasts. In people’s forecasts, that’s what’s happening. . Yeah, I think—there may be an element of the latter as well, because inflation expectations have continued to move up. You know, it’s all in people’s individual thinking, and you can’t—it’s hard to say. It’s not something the Committee debates in terms of, you know, what, what the outlook is for 2023. So I’m, I’m a little bit speculating, which I shouldn’t do. But it wouldn’t surprise me if there’s an element for some people in, you know, seeing the inflation performance that we’ve had and thinking that I have more confidence that we could see inflation above 2 percent, that it may not be as hard to do that as we thought, and that inflation expectations may move up to a—to a level—they were—they were really at a level that was kind of a little below 2 percent. They might move up as a consequence of this or, or, or as a consequence of, of, of the new framework. You know, we did see inflation expectations moving up in the—in the wake of the announcement of the framework. But, you know, we don’t really know that. So, ultimately, I think it’s consistent with both those things. . We’re looking at an economy that will not have the degree of, of fiscal support. The fiscal support in the forecast is much less than it was this year. So—but you’ve, you’ve still got a very strong growth, well above the longer run potential output of the— of the economy. You’ve got—you’ve got growth meaningfully above that, and inflation is lower next year in all of our—in all of our forecasts. I think the range of, of core PCE forecast for next year is 1.7 to 2.5 in 2022 and, and 2 to 2.3 in 2023. So you’re right, you’re seeing—I, I can’t remember the number, but it might be in the 3s—3, 3½ percent growth for next year. That’s, that’s a really good year—coming on the back of a 7 percent growth year, that’s a really good year. That’s, that’s a year with a lot of momentum. That’ll see—you know, that’ll cause significant job creation and, and it will—I mean, we would take 3½ percent. We didn’t have a 3½ percent growth year—we didn’t have a 3 percent growth year between the Global Financial Crisis and the end of the expansion. So that would be a good year. . Well, the economy’s not, not decel—the economy is still growing, and growing at a, at a very healthy rate. Our estimate—I mean, different people have different estimates—but, broadly speaking, economists think the economy has the potential to grow at around 2 percent per year. If you’re growing above that, then the unemployment rate should be declining, people should be being pulled into the labor force, wages should be going up, lots of things should be happening, businesses should be investing. So, you know, I guess to answer your question a different way, is there a risk that inflation will be higher than we think? Yes. As I said earlier, you know, we, we don’t have any certainty about the timing or the extent of these effects from reopening. And therefore we don’t—we don’t think that—we think it’s unlikely that they would materially affect the underlying inflation dynamics that the economy has had for a quarter of a century. The underlying forces around the globe that have created those dynamics are intact, and those are aging population, low productivity, globalization, all of those things that, that we think have, have, you know, really held down inflation. All that’s out there still. You know, when we get through this, we may well—we’ll be facing those same forces. Nonetheless, is there a risk that inflation will remain higher than we—than we thought? Yes. And if, if we see inflation moving above our goals in, in a time—sorry, to an extent, to a level or, or persistently—or persistently enough, you know, we would be prepared to use our tools to address that. . A higher neutral rate would mean that interest rates would run higher by that amount. And, and that would be a good thing from the standpoint of the economy, because it would give the Fed more room to cut rates. The problem with, with interest rates being close to the lower bound, of course, is that it really cuts into our ability to react to a downturn—for example, a pandemic. And if you look, for example, at the European Central Bank, their, their policy rate was well below zero when, when the pandemic hit. So we don’t want to be in a place where we can’t react. A higher neutral rate would, would be—from that narrow standpoint, would be a good thing for us. It would give us more room and, therefore, then, that would tend to result in better outcomes for the economy over time. You know, we, it’s—you can’t estimate it with great—with great precision. I think we would be alert to—I mean, studying r* is a—is a whole industry unto itself. And I, I think we would be alert to factors that might raise r*, the neutral rate of interest. And, you know, we, we try to keep up with that. And I think we’re, we’re, we’re all thinking about that and the possibility of that. You know, there are many—there are a lot of stories right now that could—that essentially could lead to higher productivity growth and higher r*. We don’t know which of those stories will come true. But, I mean, I’ll give you an example. It’s just there are—there are a lot of start ups, a lot of early stage companies. And is that going to have that effect? We don’t know. But we’ll be watching those things carefully. . So that’s a—that’s a few questions there. So let me say, first, I think people misinterpret the framework. I think the—there’s nothing wrong with the framework, and there’s nothing in the framework that would in any way, you know, interfere with our ability to pursue our, our goals. That’s for starters. All of our discussions and all of our thinking and planning are taking place in the context of our new framework. We’re strongly committed to it, we think it’s well suited to our goals, including in this—in this unique time. And I think if you look at the—look at the forecasts that we’ve written down, you know, our Committee is solidly behind them. The forecasts are all consistent with that. You know, your specific question, I guess, was, will we be behind the curve? And, you know, that’s, that’s not the situation we’re facing at all. The situation that we, we addressed in our—in our Statement on Longer Run Goals and Monetary Policy Strategy was a situation in which employment was at very high levels, but inflation was low. And what we said was, we wouldn’t raise interest rates just because unemployment was low and employment was high if there was no evidence of inflation or other troubling imbalances. So that’s what we said. That is not at all the current situation. In the current situation, we have many millions of people who are unemployed, and we have inflation running well above our target. The question we face with this inflation has nothing to do with our framework. It’s a very different, very difficult version of a standard investment—sorry, a central banking question. And that is, how do you separate in inflation—how do you separate things that, that follow from broad upward price pressures from things that really are a function of, of sort of idiosyncratic factors in a particular—due to particular things? I mean, a classic example was, to pick a narrow example, was the cellphone price war back in 2017. If you remember, there was—prices were incredibly low, and it held down core PCE by three tenths or something for a year, and then it fell out. So this is much bigger than that. And, of course, it’s not—it’s not easy to tell in real time which is which, but that’s, that’s the question you would face under, really, any framework. And, you know, we’re trying to sort that out. I’ve tried to, to explain that today about how we think about that. And, you know, we do think that these are temporary factors, and that they’ll wane. We can’t be absolutely certain about the timing of that, and we’re prepared to use our tools as appropriate. Your second one was? Oh, you know, we will—we will taper when we feel that the economy has achieved substantial further progress. And we will communicate very carefully in advance on that. And that’s what we’re doing. That’s what we’re going to do, and, and we will follow through on that. There’s no—I mean, we will do what we can to avoid a market reaction. But, ultimately, when we achieve our macroeconomic goal, we will—we will taper as appropriate. The third thing was—what was the third thing? . That’s right. And we—look, we have to balance the two—the two goals: maximum employment and price stability. Often they are—they do pull in the same direction, of course. But when we—when we raise interest rates to control inflation, there’s no question that has an effect on activity. And that’s the channel—one of the channels through which we get to inflation. We don’t think that we’re in a situation like that right now. We think that the economy is recovering from a deep hole—an unusual hole, actually, because it’s to do with, with shutting down the economy. It turns out it’s a heck of a lot easier to create demand than it is to, you know, to bring supply back up to snuff. That’s happening all over the world. There’s no reason to think that that process will last indefinitely. But we’re going, you know, we’re going to watch carefully to make sure that, that evolving inflation and our understanding of what’s happening is, is, is right. And in the meantime, we’ll conduct policy appropriately.

****FOMCpresconf20210728

. Good afternoon. At the Federal Reserve, we are strongly committed to achieving the monetary policy goals that Congress has given us: maximum employment and price stability. Today the Federal Open Market Committee kept interest rates near zero and maintained our asset purchases. These measures, along with our strong guidance on interest rates and on our balance sheet, will ensure that monetary policy will continue to support the economy until the recovery is complete. Progress in vaccinations and unprecedented fiscal policy actions are also providing strong support to the recovery. Indicators of economic activity and employment have continued to strengthen, and real GDP this year appears to be on track to post its fastest rate of increase in decades. Much of this rapid growth reflects the continued bounceback in activity from depressed levels. The sectors most adversely affected by the pandemic have shown improvement but have not fully recovered. Household spending is rising at an especially rapid pace, boosted by the ongoing reopening of the economy and ongoing policy support. The housing sector remains very strong, and business investment is increasing at a solid pace. In some industries, near term supply constraints are restraining activity. These constraints are particularly acute in the motor vehicle industry, where worldwide shortages of semiconductors have sharply curtailed production so far this year. As with overall economic activity, conditions in the labor market have continued to improve. Demand for labor is very strong, and employment rose 850,000 in June, with the leisure and hospitality sector continuing to post notable gains. Nonetheless, the labor market has a ways to go. The unemployment rate in June—in June was 5.9 percent, and this figure understates the shortfall in employment, particularly as participation in the labor market has not moved up from the low rates that have prevailed for most of the past year. Factors related to the pandemic, such as caregiving needs, ongoing fears of the virus, and unemployment insurance payments, appear to be weighing on employment growth. These factors should wane in coming months, leading to strong gains in employment. The economic downturn has not fallen equally on all Americans, and those least able to shoulder the burden have been hardest hit. In particular, despite progress, joblessness continues to fall disproportionately on lower wage workers in the service sector and on African Americans and Hispanics. Inflation has increased notably and will likely remain elevated in coming months before moderating. As the economy continues to reopen and spending rebounds, we are seeing upward pressure on prices, particularly because supply bottlenecks in some sectors have limited how quickly production can respond in the near term. These bottleneck effects have been larger than anticipated, but as these transitory supply effects abate, inflation is expected to drop back toward our longer run goal. Very low readings from early in the pandemic as well as the pass through of past increases in oil prices to consumer energy prices also contribute to the increase, although these base effects and energy effects are receding. The process of reopening the economy is unprecedented, as was the shutdown at the onset of the pandemic. As the reopening continues, bottlenecks, hiring difficulties, and other constraints could continue to limit how quickly supply can adjust, raising the possibility that inflation could turn out to be higher and more persistent than we expect. Our new framework for monetary policy emphasizes the importance of having well anchored inflation expectations, both to, to foster price stability and to enhance our ability to promote our broad based and inclusive maximum employment goal. Indicators of long term inflation expectations appear broadly consistent with our longer  run inflation goal of 2 percent. If we saw signs that the path of inflation or longer term inflation expectations were moving materially and persistently beyond levels consistent with our goal, we’d be prepared to adjust the stance of policy. The effects of the pandemic on the economy have continued to diminish, but risks to the economic outlook remain. Progress on vaccinations has limited the spread of COVID 19. However, the pace of vaccinations has slowed, and the Delta strain of the virus is spreading quickly in some areas. Continued progress on vaccinations would support a return to more normal economic conditions. The Fed’s policy actions have been guided by our mandate to promote maximum employment and stable prices for the American people, along with our responsibilities to promote the stability of the financial system. As the Committee reiterated in today’s policy statement, with inflation having run persistently below 2 percent, we will aim to achieve inflation moderately above 2 percent for some time so that inflation averages 2 percent over time and longer term inflation expectations remain well anchored at 2 percent. We expect to maintain an accommodative stance of monetary policy until these employment and inflation outcomes are achieved. With regard to interest rates, we continue to expect that it will be appropriate to maintain the current 0 to ¼ percent target range for the federal funds rate until labor market conditions have reached level—levels consistent with the Committee’s assessment of maximum employment and inflation has risen to 2 percent and is on track to moderately exceed 2 percent for some time. In addition, we are continuing to—continuing to increase our holdings of Treasury securities by at least $80 billion per month and of agency MBS by at least $40 billion per month until substantial further progress has been made toward our maximum employment and price  stability goals. Our asset purchases have been a critical tool. They helped preserve financial stability and market functioning early in the pandemic and since then have helped foster accommodative financial conditions to support the economy. At our meeting that concluded earlier today, the Committee continued to discuss the progress made toward our—toward our goals since the Committee adopted its asset purchase guidance last December. We also reviewed some considerations around how our asset purchases might be adjusted, including their pace and composition, once economic conditions warrant a change. Participants expect that the economy will continue to move toward our standard of “substantial further progress.” In coming meetings, the Committee will again assess the economy’s progress toward our goals, and the timing of any change in the pace of our asset purchases will depend on the incoming data. As we’ve said, we will provide advance notice before making any changes to our purchases. On a final note, we announced the establishment of two standing repo facilities, a domestic one for primary dealers and additional banks and another for foreign and international monetary authorities. These facilities will serve as backstops in money markets to support the effective implementation of monetary policy and smooth market functioning. To conclude, we understand that our actions affect communities, families, and businesses across the country. Everything we do is in service to our public mission. We at the Fed will do everything we can to support the economy for as long as it takes to complete the recovery. Thank you. I look forward to your questions. . Great. Thank you. So more detail on substantial further progress. So let’s talk about the maximum employment part of that. As you know, with maximum employment—unlike with, with price stability, where we can target a number of 2 percent on average—with maximum employment, there isn’t a single number that we can target. That the— we monitor a broad range of, of, of data about different aspects of the labor market. There’s unemployment, unemployment among different, different age groups, and such. There’s participation. There’s wages. There’s all kinds of flow data. And we look at all of it to try to arrive at a picture of what—of what is maximum employment. So there isn’t—I can’t give you a, a, a set of numbers—for example, a numerical threshold like we used for a time back in 2012, I guess it was. We didn’t do that here. What we said was substantial further progress toward our goals. And what we said was, we would keep, effectively, we’d—we would give advance warning as we—and, and, you know, more and more clarity—as, as we move forward. And that’s what we’re going to try to do. So what would substantial further progress be? I’d say we have some ground to cover on, on the labor market side. I think we’re, we’re some way away from, from having had substantial further progress with, with max—toward the maximum employment goal. I would want to see some strong job numbers. And, and that’s, that’s kind of the idea. . So inflation is running well above our 2 percent objective and has been for a few months and is expected to run up certainly above our objective for a few months before we believe it’ll, it’ll move back down toward our objective. The question whether we’ve met that objective formally is really one for the Committee to make. I can’t—I can’t do that by myself. But it’s clear that, at this time, inflation is actually running above 2 percent. And, and, again, has been and will be, at least we expect it will, in coming months before returning down toward our target. . Yes, yes. We can hear you. . So, as you know, we’re, we’re in a process now where what we said is that as—at this meeting and in coming meetings, we’re going to be continuing to assess the economy’s progress toward our goals and give advance notice. We’ll be—try to provide additional clarity about our thinking, both in the—in the postmeeting statement and in the minutes and in the public comments that people make. You know, our, our approach here has been to be as transparent as we can. We have not reached substantial further progress yet. So we’re, we’re not there, and we see our ways as having some—we see ourselves as having some ground to cover to get there. So that’s what I would say. In terms of—in terms of, of COVID and the Delta strain, I’ll say a couple things. Of course, it will have significant health consequences for many. And we need to keep that in mind before we start—before we mention and move to the economic questions. This is a—rising cases in, in a number of parts of the country, and some forecasts are for them to rise quite significantly. We’ll see. What we’ve seen, though, is with successive waves of, of COVID over the past year and some months now, there has tended to be less economic—less in the way of economic implications from each wave. And we will see whether that is the case with the Delta variety. But it’s, you know, it’s a—it’s certainly a—not an unreasonable expectation. So it, it certainly is plausible if people would pull back from some activities because of the risk of infection. Dining out, traveling, schools might—some schools might not reopen. We may just—we may see economic effects from some of that, or it might weigh on, on the return to the labor market. Some people might choose—again, we, we don’t have a strong sense of how that might work out, so we’ll just be monitoring it—monitoring it carefully. . That, that would, again, be a question for the Committee. But I would really say, the guidance that you’re talking about is really the guidance to do with liftoff, right? That’s—what the guidance is for liftoff, we had to have labor market conditions consistent with full employment, inflation at 2 percent and on track to run—to run moderately above 2 percent for some time. It really isn’t relevant now. It—because we’re really—we’re looking at, at tapering asset purchases. We’re clearly a ways away from considering raising interest rates. It’s not something that, that is on our radar screen right now. You know, so when we get to that question, when we start to get to the question of, of liftoff, which, which we are not at all at now or near now, that’s when we’ll ask that question. That is when that, that will become a real question for us. . Jeanna, I’m sorry. For the first 15 seconds of your question, you froze. Could you—could you say that again? I apologize. . Thanks. So it’s an—it’s an important feature of this recovery is how uneven it is. And, in many cases, that’s related to the fact that some countries have had little in the way of access to, to vaccines. And so they’re seeing significant outbreaks, and it’s weighing on economic activity, whereas other countries—such as the United States, in particular—are having a very strong rebound. And, and now Europe is having a stronger rebound as well. So it’s a feature of our economy. Now, how does it affect our policy? In, in a couple of ways, potentially. One just is that, in general, economies—and through financial markets and through trade—are, are deeply interconnected now. And so a stronger global economy will lead to more U.S. exports. And, and, you know, that’ll help economic activity. To the extent the global economy is weak and the United States is strong, it’ll—we’ll wind up, you know, we’ll wind up exporting some of our demand through, through imports rather than having, having a lot of exports. That’s one way. Another way, though, is more on the risk side. And that is, as long as COVID is running loose out there, as long as there’s time and space for the development of new strains, no one’s really finally safe. These, these strains—there’s no reason they just can’t keep coming and one, you know, one more powerful than the next. We don’t know that. But that’s, that’s, that’s certainly a plausible outcome. Now, as, as vaccinations rise, we can nonetheless get back to our economic activity. But, you know, it, it is both the right thing to do and, and very much in our interest to make sure that vaccination happens broadly around the world, just for that reason. . Sure. I’d be glad to. So if you look, again, if you look at the, the most recent inflation report, what you see is that it came in significantly higher than expected. But essentially all of the overshoot can be tied to a handful of categories. It isn’t the kind of inflation that’s spread broadly across the economy. It’s new, used, and rental cars. It’s airplane tickets. It’s hotels. And it’s a couple of other things. And each of those has a story attached to it that is—that is really about the reopening of the economy. So we look at that, and we think that those are temporary things because the, the supply side will respond. The economy will adapt. We have a very adaptive, adaptable, flexible economy and labor market. And it’s a real—a real asset that we have. And so we think that inflation should move down over time. Now, we don’t have any—much confidence, let’s say, in the timing of that or the size of the effects in the near term. I would say, in the near term, that the, the, the risks to inflation are probably to the upside. I, I, I have some confidence in the—in the medium term, that inflation will move back down. Again, it’s hard to say when that will be. I, I, I will say, though, that, you know, we—inflation is half of our mandate. Price stability is half of our mandate. And if we were to see inflation moving up to levels persistently that were—that were above, significantly, materially above our goal and particularly if inflation expectations were to move up, we would use our tools to guide inflation back down to 2 percent. So we won’t have an extended period of, of high inflation. We think that, that some of it will, will fall away naturally as the process of reopening the economy moves through. And it could take some time. In any case, we will use our tools over time as appropriate to make sure that we do have inflation that averages 2 percent over time. . Well, so in terms of what’s been happening in bond markets, I don’t think there’s a real consensus on, on what explains the moves between the last meeting and this meeting. We’ve seen the long term yields go down significantly. Some of it is a fall in real yields, which may have been connected to—some speculate—connected to sentiment around the, the spread of the Delta variant and concern about growth. There was also some decline in inflation compensation, which has significantly reversed. And there, there are also so called technical factors, which is where you put things that you can’t quite explain. So I, I, I don’t see in any of that that there is really anything that challenges the credibility of our framework, if, if that’s really your question. We are committed to achieving 2 percent average inflation over time. What we said was that, in particular, when we see a very strong labor market, high levels of employment, low levels of unemployment, that won’t be enough for us to raise interest rates until we see some inflation. Of course, what we have today is kind of the opposite. We’ve got, you know, 7 or 8 million people, fewer people, at work than were at work before the pandemic. So we’re, you know, we’re, we’re a ways away from full maximum employment. But we have high inflation, so it’s kind of the opposite case. And we have to—we have to deal with that. Any central bank has to deal with that by looking at the inflation and asking whether it is broad based and likely to be persistent and, and, and whether inflation expectations are implicated in a way that, that could cause them to rise. So we’re monitoring that very carefully, and we’re prepared to use our tools as appropriate. But, again, I think our—I think our framework is pretty well understood. And, and I think the real test of it will be down the road when it’s time to think about raising interest rates and, and how we assess, assess that set of issues. . So there’s a—there’s a part in our Statement on Longer Run Goals and, and Monetary Policy Strategy, which, Rich, I’m sure—I’m sure you’re familiar with, which, which talks about that case in which the two goals are in tension. Most of the time, if you have high inflation, you also have high employment—they, they tend to go together. This is a situation where they’re temporarily in different directions. We’re not at full employment, but we are having high inflation. We feel like we’re going to be making good progress over the next—over the course of the next year, couple of years, really, toward maximum employment. This is a very strong labor market. If you look at the number of job openings compared to the number of unemployed, it’s—we’re, we’re clearly on a path to a very strong labor market with high participation, low unemployment, high employment, wages moving up across the spectrum. That, that’s, that’s the path that we’re on, and, and it shouldn’t take that long in macroeconomic time to get there. So that’s, that’s what I think is, is really the likely case. And, again, it’s not—it’s not timely for us to be thinking about, about raising interest rates right now. What we’re doing is, we’re, we’re looking at our asset purchases and judging what is right for the economy and judging how we—how close we are to substantial further progress and then—and then tapering after that. The question you asked about, would we raise rates if we hadn’t finished cutting—hadn’t finished the taper, hypothetical question. You know, we’d, we’d face the circumstance at the time. We could always just—you know, one thing one could do would be to just cut asset purchases all the way to zero if you wanted to do that. But it’s, it’s, it’s just hard to—it’s hard to answer what you would do without knowing a lot more about the situation. Ideally, you wouldn’t be still buying assets and raising rates because, of course, you’re adding accommodation by buying and, and removing accommodation by raising rates. So that wouldn’t be ideal. I’ll say that. . It’s a—it’s a really unusual situation to have—to have the ratio of vacancies to unemployed be this high. And we think there are a number of things at work there. Maybe the place to start is, is just to say that this is now not so much about people going back to their old jobs. It’s about finding a new job. So that’s a time intensive, labor intensive process. And there may be a bit of a speed limit on that. There, there’s research that suggests that there is a speed limit on that. So it’s not like you can have millions of people at the beginning of the recovery going back in a single month because they’re just going back to their old job. This is about job selection, things like that. There may also be some factors that are—that are holding people back, and that’s—this is what surveys say. There are people who, who are reluctant to go back to work because they still feel exposed to COVID. These could be jobs where, where there was a lot of, of interaction with the public and where perhaps there’s a family member who’s vulnerable or for whatever reason. There’s also caretakers who are—where, where schools are not fully open and parents are at home or taking care of, of, of older people. And there’s also been very generous unemployment benefits, which are now rolling off. They’ll be—they’ll be fully rolled off in a couple of months. And all of those factors should, should wane. And, you know, we, we think we should see, because of that, we should see strong job creation moving forward. I mean, ultimately, it’s unusual to see aspects like the job openings number in a context where there are that many unemployed people. That many job openings would typically suggest a tight labor market. And, of course, we hear from businesses all over the country that it’s very hard to hire people. And that may be because people, people are shopping carefully for their next job. I mean, I, I, I think the bottom line on this is, people want to work. If you look at where labor force participation can get, people will go back to work unless they retire. Some people will retire. But, generally speaking, Americans want to work, and, and they’ll find their way into the jobs that they want. It may take some time, though. . Sure. So if you remember the, the summer wave last year of COVID, which was largely southern and western states, the economy just performed much better than anyone expected. You know, we, we were coming off the spring wave, where there were a lot of shutdowns. And then this big second wave hit, and I think the natural thing to do is to expect that, that it would have a real impact on the economy. And it was much less than, than people thought. People—what’s happened is, first of all, many people are vaccinated. They’re going on with their lives. Secondly, we’ve kind of learned to live with it. A lot of industries have, have kind of improvised their way around it—particularly, for example, buying a new home. That, that process of buying a new home very quickly moved to much more of a virtual process. And so they were able to, you know, to, to do that. And other industries as well have gone to take out and, you know, no contact things. It’s—so that can all—it seems like we’ve learned to, to handle this. Now, I think people would like to get back to, to, you know, the way things were. And I, I, I hope to some extent, we will over time. You know, of course, the big wave we had last winter did have significant employment effects, particularly in, you know, hospitality and leisure and other entertainment—other, other areas with a lot of direct contact. A lot of jobs were lost then because that was a very strong wave that happened in, in, in the winter months last year, just before the vaccines arrived. So with Delta, we’re just going to have to watch. Again, with, with, with a reasonably high percentage of the country vaccinated and the vaccine apparently being effective—we’re not experts on this—but it, it seems like the—a good—a good going in estimate would be that the effects will probably be less. There probably won’t be significant lockdowns and things like that. But, again, those, those are not decisions for us or, or, or—nor is it something we’re be— we’d be expert in. In terms of the, the, the channels, you know, I—this is—this is kind of speculation, but it’s pretty—it just is that people, you could imagine school districts deciding to wait a month or two for the—for the—for the Delta wave to go. I’m not saying this’ll happen, but that it’s easy to imagine that. It’s also easy to imagine that some people might say, you know what? I’m just going to—I’m just going to wait a couple of months before going back to work. Wouldn’t be hard to imagine that happening. If, if schools don’t open, then caretakers have to stay home. And if people don’t go back into the labor force, then the job growth won’t be as strong, those kinds of things. So I don’t—it doesn’t—it doesn’t—again, sitting here today, not being able to really know the future—it doesn’t seem as though the effects will be very large. But there may be effects. And they—it may be that the effect is to slow the economy down just for a period of months—or not. There are many parts of the country where it might not have an effect, and we’re just going to have to, to see what the economic effects are. . The concept of “transitory” is really this: It is that the increases will happen. We’re not saying they will reverse. That’s not what “transitory” means. It means that the increases in prices will happen, so there will be inflation but that the process of inflation will stop so that—so that there won’t be further—when, when we think of inflation, we really think of inflation going up year upon year upon year upon year. That’s inflation. When you have inflation for 12 months or whatever it might be—I’m just taking an example  I’m not making an estimate—then, then you have a price increase, but you don’t have an inflation process. And so part of that just is that, if it doesn’t affect longer term inflation expectations, then it’s very likely not to infect—to affect the process of inflation going forward. So what, what I mean by “transitory” is just something that doesn’t leave a permanent mark on the inflation process. Again, we don’t mean—I don’t mean that, that, that, that, you know, producers are going to take those price increases back. That’s, that’s not the idea. It’s just that they won’t go on indefinitely. So to the extent people are, are, are implementing price increases because raw materials are going up or labor costs or something’s going up, you know, the question, really, for inflation really is, does that mean they’re going to go up the next year by the same amount? So you’re going to be in a process where inflation, the inflation process, gets going. And, and that happens because people’s expectations about future inflation move up. And we don’t think that’s happening. There’s no evidence that it’s happening. All the evidence is that it’s not happening. But, nonetheless, we have to watch this very carefully because this is—you know, we have two mandates: maximum employment and price stability. Price stability, for us, means inflation averaging 2 percent over time. And so we’ve got to be very careful about that. But, but I, I, I think it’s a good point that it’s, it’s a term—what it really means is temporary. But then you’ve got to understand that it doesn’t mean that the—that the increases will be taken back. Some of them will be, but, but that’s not really what it means. In terms of—so we’re, we’re working virtually here, and we’ll be coming back down the road in a couple of months, starting to bring people back here at the Board of Governors in Washington. And, you know, we’re going to follow public health guidance and things like that. We really haven’t made the fundamental decisions about exactly what that will look like. And it’ll depend on, to some extent, on what—on what, you know, CDC guidance looks like when we actually do bring people back in. . So in any decisions about the timing, and I did not—if I—if I said we’re looking at wanting a couple more months of data, I wasn’t—I’m not meaning to suggest anything about a particular time at which we might taper, because we really have not made that decision. All I’m saying is, is, we’re not at substantial further progress. There’s a range of views on, on what timing will be appropriate. And those views ultimately track, track back to people’s views about the economy and, and what will happen as we make progress towards, towards our—towards our goal. So that’s, that’s really what it is. And I, I—we will, of course, as we—you know, we’re going to continue to try to provide clarity as appropriate on, on timing, pace, and composition. But, today, I’ve, I’ve given you what I can give you because, again, this, this was the first, really, I would say, deep dive on the issues of timing, pace, and composition. And it was a good meeting. And—but no decisions are made, and, and I’m just not in a position to, to give you much guidance, really any guidance, on the actual timing. I—but I will say we’re making progress. We expect further progress. And we expect that, if, if things go well, then we will—we will reach that goal. And when we reach it and the Committee is comfortable that we have reached it, then, then we’ll taper at that point. I can’t, I really—there’s nothing I can say about Jackson Hole. You know, I’m in—we’re in the process of writing that speech. And I am going to give a speech, and—but I, I, I wouldn’t want to—I wouldn’t want to say what will be in there at this point. . We—asset purchases were just a key part of our response to the critical phase of the crisis. They, they really helped us restore market function to these key markets, really, on which—on which, which are very, very important to our economy and the global economy. And then they were a big part of, of creating accommodative financial conditions to support demand. They were strongly needed. It was that commitment to continue asset purchases that provided strong support for the economy and, and has been a part of the story for why the economy is so strong right now. So we said we would taper when we—when we achieve substantial further progress. And, and, you know, we’re going to honor that commitment. I mean, it’s—and, and, again, we’re talking about it right now and meeting by meeting and, and moving in that direction. We will taper when we reach that goal. And we’ll provide more, you know, more clarity on that as we go, as is appropriate. . Well, I think strong capital requirements are essential for banks, particularly for the largest banks. And I think that an undercapitalized banking system, as we’ve seen, can be a real threat to the economy and most—mostly, or to, to the greatest extent, to people at the lower end of the income spectrum. So if you look back at not this previous—not this crisis but the previous one, the bank—the banking system was undercapitalized. So higher capital requirements are, are, you know, are, are really a good thing because they allow banks to weather downturns and continue to perform the functions that they perform. I think it’s other tools that we have to—and the Fed has some of these tools, Congress has some of these tools, other agencies have some of these tools—to assure or support the wide availability of credit, particularly to low  and moderate income communities. So that’s CRA. We enforce CRA. We’re working on a—on a new CRA proposal right now with the other banking agencies, and we think it’s going to be—it’s going to be good and will support the flow of credit to low  and moderate income households. It’s also the anti—anti– lending discrimination statutes that we enforce. And it’s some of the programs that Congress has in place to support the flow of credit to low  and moderate income communities. I, I don’t think it’s capital standards at all. I think capital standards work the other way. Strong capital is what enables banks to continue to serve their communities, including low  and moderate income communities. . Right. So with inflation, as I mentioned, we’re, we look not just at the headline number, but we look at all the components that go into the calculation of inflation. And if you do that, if you look under the hood, what you see is not that, widely, across the whole range of goods and services that, that are in the economy, we’re seeing upward, upward pressure on prices. That’s not really what we’re seeing. What we’re seeing is a handful of things that are really—that really account for the, the overshoot of inflation. And, as I mentioned, it’s things like cars. You know, new, used, and rental cars have moved up in price because of the car shortage because of the semiconductor shortage. And housing—sorry, hotels and air, air fares have moved back up, but that really just is retracing the very large downward movement in prices that they had before. So that’s, that’s a big, big part of, of why the inflation readings are so high. And those don’t—those, frankly, don’t carry significant implications in the long run for the—for inflation or for the American economy. So what I said was, we, we’re going to see whether these things—we don’t need to see everything do what lumber prices have done. So if you look at lumber prices, they went up and then they went down. So what we want to see is these other things. Do they—do they—do the prices flatten out? Do they actually move down? If they flatten out, then their, their contribution to inflation becomes zero over time so that they’re not contributing to inflation. And so, if we start to see those things happen fairly widely among the—among the things that have really moved up quickly, then we’ll, we’ll—they won’t all happen at once or happen quickly—but we’ll know that our basic understanding of the situation is broadly correct. And I don’t think it will take, or what I said was, I don’t think it’ll take a very long time to see whether that’s the case. It, it, it is probably the case that, frankly, the, the overall reopening of the economy is going to play out over a period of time. This is a historic, world historical event, that the global economy is now reopening. It’s not going to—it’s not going to happen quickly. It’s going to take some time. And it’s going to be very uneven, as we discussed before. But I think we will—we will know, you know, when we know. But I don’t think it will take that long. I don’t want to put a number on it. But I do think that, that, if we see those things happening, we’ll know that we have the story basically right. . So a number of participants raised that—the questions around MBS and tapering at, at today’s meeting, as a matter of fact, and yesterday’s meeting. And I’ll just say that, generally speaking, I don’t think and—I don’t think that—I think that Treasury and MBS purchases affect financial conditions in very similar ways. There may be modest differences in terms of, of contribution to housing prices, but it’s, it’s not something that’s big. It’s not—it’s—so where I think we are is, there, there really is little support for the idea of tapering MBS earlier than Treasuries. I think we will taper them at the same time. It seems likely, based on where people are now. The idea of reducing MBS purchases at a somewhat faster pace than Treasuries does have some attraction for some people—others, not so much. And I think it’s something that we’ll be continuing to discuss. . So on the standing repo facility, what is it going to do? So it, it really is a backstop. So it’s, it’s set at 25 basis points, so out of the money, and it’s, it’s there to help address pressures in money market—money markets that could impede the effective implementation of monetary policy. So, really, it’s, it’s to support the function of—functioning of monetary policy and its, its effectiveness. That’s the purpose of it. And it’s set up with that purpose in mind. Your question on, on the, the [ON]RRP, so we think it’s doing what it’s supposed to do, what we expect of it to do, which is to help provide a floor for money market rates and help ensure that the federal funds, funds rate stays within the target range. You know, it’s essentially, essentially, what’s happening is that it just results in a lower aggregate amount of Federal Reserve liabilities that are in banks in the form of reserves and a higher amount of Federal Reserve liabilities in money market funds in the form of overnight RRP balances. So that, that’s all that’s really happening there. And we expect it to be high for some time. It’s being driven, of course, by, by the relatively lower quantity of Treasury bills and, and, and also the onset of the debt ceiling and the decline in the TGA, things like that. So we don’t— we don’t have a problem with, with what it’s doing. It’s kind of doing the job we expected. . Not, not really. Not at this point. I mean, money markets, private money market funds are, are choosing to, to invest because the rates are attractive. At some point, the rates will not be so attractive as, as the whole rate cluster normalizes, and, and you’ll see it shrink back down. . I certainly don’t, don’t have that in mind. No. Look, we—as you know, we’re targeting a moderate overshoot of 2 percent inflation for some time. We, we want inflation expectations to be centered on, on 2 percent. We feel like they may be a little bit below that. So the bigger picture is that, you know, that, that, that would be a healthy thing. This is a different thing. This is—this is not that. That was the kind of inflation we were thinking about that comes from, you know, from a very, very strong labor market and a—and a booming economy maybe. That, that was the kind of inflation—this, this is something different. This is really driven by the supply side, which is not able to hand—to handle this big spike in demand that we’re seeing. As the economy reopens with vaccination and fiscal support and monetary policy support, the supply side—just all over the world, you’re seeing the same thing, which is, it just can’t keep up. And there are labor shortages in, in a lot of places, the same sort of thing. So, you know, there’s, there’s absolutely no sense of panic. I just—I’ve explained, I think, several times here today that the best—my, my best estimate is that this is something that will pass. It’s really a shock to the economy that will pass through. And, you know, if you—if you look at where forecasters are—people who actually write down a forecast for a living—very, very strongly they see it that way. Now, we—but, you know, are—we’re actually responsible for this, though, so we have to take seriously the risk, the risk case, which is that inflation will be more persistent, that it might actually move inflation expectations up, and that we might—that the kind of things that might require a response. We, again, we don’t see that now. But we, we have to be on the alert for it. And people have to understand and believe that we will react if, if we need to. And we will. But, again, it’s not—it’s not my base case. My base case is that—is, as I’ve said repeatedly, is that inflation will move back down. And no, we’re not—we, we have not at all changed our view, and I haven’t changed my view that inflation running above 2 percent, moderately above 2 percent, is a desirable thing. This is not moderately above 2 percent. This is well above 2 percent. But it’s also not the kind of inflation we were looking for. This is really driven by a supply side shock. . So wages have moved up. A lot of that is driven by new hires. And it’s—a lot of it is driven at relatively low paid jobs in the service industries as people come back. So that’s not troubling. And we, we don’t see—there, there is a form of wage inflation that can lead to price inflation, and we’re not seeing that right now. And that really is if what we call “unit labor costs” move up and, and, and, which really puts—move up in a way that is—that is hard for companies to manage and puts them in a situation where they have to accept substantially lower margins or raise prices. Now, when it happens gradually, when that—if you—we’ve seen in a long expansion, sometimes unit labor costs do move up and, and put some pressure on margins. In a long expansion, that’s been happening late in the expansion. That’s not a problem, either. The problem is if it happens in a way that pushes firms broadly into raising prices. It was called the “wage–price spiral.” We don’t see that now. This is something that was a feature of the high inflationary era of the Great Inflation, but it’s not a feature now. And we don’t see that now. Of course, we’ll be watching it. And this is one of the reasons why we’re watching so carefully to see whether labor force—whether people do come back and accept jobs. Given the very large number of job openings and the very large number of unemployed people, we’d like to see, you know, those— some matching going on there so people get back to work. We think labor supply would be— would be a healthy thing. You know, but wages moving up across the spectrum, consistent with inflation and productivity, is a—is a good thing.

****FOMCpresconf20210922

. Good afternoon. At the Federal Reserve, we are strongly committed to achieving the monetary policy goals that Congress has given us: maximum employment and price stability. Today, the Federal Open Market Committee kept interest rates near zero and maintained our current pace of asset purchases. These measures, along with our strong guidance on interest rates and on our balance sheet, will ensure that monetary policy will continue to support the economy until the recovery is complete. Progress on vaccinations and unprecedented fiscal policy actions are also providing strong support to the recovery. Indicators of economic activity and employment have continued to strengthen. Real GDP rose at a robust 6.4 percent pace in the first half of the year, and growth is widely expected to continue at a strong pace in the second half. The sectors most adversely affected by the pandemic have improved in recent months, but the rise in COVID 19 cases has slowed their recovery. Household spending rose at an especially rapid pace over the first half of the year but flattened out in July and August as spending softened in COVID sensitive sectors, such as travel and restaurants. Additionally, in some industries, near term supply constraints are restraining activity. These constraints are particularly acute in the motor vehicle industry, where the worldwide shortage of semiconductors has sharply curtailed production. Partly reflecting the effects of the virus and supply constraints, forecasts from FOMC participants for economic growth this year have been revised somewhat lower since our June Summary of Economic Projections, but participants still foresee rapid growth. As with overall economic activity, conditions in the labor market have continued to improve. Demand for labor is very strong, and job gains averaged 750,000 per month over the past three months. In August, however, job gains slowed markedly, with the slowdown concentrated in sectors most sensitive to the pandemic, including leisure and hospitality. The unemployment rate was 5.2 percent in August, and this figure understates the shortfall in employment, particularly as participation in the labor market has not moved up from the low rates that have prevailed for most of the past year. Factors related to the pandemic, such as caregiving needs and ongoing fears of the virus, appear to be weighing on employment growth. These factors should diminish with progress on containing the virus, leading to more rapid gains in employment. Looking ahead, FOMC participants project the labor market to continue to improve, with the median projection for the unemployment rate standing at 4.8 percent at the end of this year and 3.5 percent in 2023 and ’24. The economic downturn has not fallen equally on all Americans, and those least able to shoulder the burden have been hardest hit. In particular, despite progress, joblessness continues to fall disproportionately on lower wage workers in the service sector and on African Americans and Hispanics. Inflation is elevated and will likely remain so in coming months before moderating. As the economy continues to reopen and spending rebounds, we are seeing upward pressure on prices, particularly because supply bottlenecks in some sectors have limited how quickly production can respond in the near term. These bottleneck effects have been larger and longer lasting than anticipated, leading to upward revisions to participants’ inflation projections for this year. While these supply effects are prominent for now, they will abate, and as they do, inflation is expected to drop back toward our longer run goal. The median inflation projection from FOMC participants falls from 4.2 percent this year to 2.2 percent next year. The process of reopening the economy is unprecedented, as was the shutdown at the onset of the pandemic. As the reopening continues, bottlenecks, hiring difficulties, and other constraints could again prove to be greater and longer lasting than anticipated, posing upside risks to inflation. Our framework for monetary policy emphasizes the importance of having well anchored inflation expectations, both to foster price stability and to enhance our ability to promote our broad based and inclusive maximum employment goal. Indicators of longer term inflation expectations appear broadly consistent with our longer run inflation goal of 2 percent. If sustained higher inflation were to become a serious concern, we would certainly respond and use our tools to assure that inflation runs at levels that are consistent with our goal. The path of the economy continues to depend on the course of the virus, and risks to the economic outlook remain. The Delta variant has led to significant increases in COVID 19 cases, resulting in significant hardship and loss and slowing the economic recovery. Continued progress on vaccinations would help contain the virus and support a return to more normal economic conditions. The Fed’s policy actions have been guided by our mandate to promote maximum employment and stable prices for the American people, along with our responsibilities to promote the stability of the financial system. Our asset purchases have been a critical tool. They helped preserve financial stability and market functioning early in the pandemic and since then have helped foster accommodative financial conditions to support the economy. At our meeting that concluded earlier today, the Committee continued to discuss the progress made toward our goals since the Committee adopted its asset purchase guidance last December. Since then, the economy has made progress toward these goals. If progress continues broadly as expected, the Committee judges that a moderation in the pace of asset purchases may soon be warranted. We also discussed the appropriate pace of tapering asset purchases once economic conditions satisfy the criterion laid out in the Committee’s guidance. While no decisions were made, participants generally view that, so long as the recovery remains on track, a gradual tapering process that concludes around the middle of next year is likely to be appropriate. Even after our balance sheet stops expanding, our elevated holdings of longer term securities will continue to support accommodative financial conditions. The timing and pace of the coming reduction in asset purchases will not be intended to carry a direct signal regarding the timing of interest rate liftoff, for which we have articulated a different and substantially more stringent test. We continue to expect that it will be appropriate to maintain the current 0 to ¼ percent target range for the federal funds rate until labor market conditions have reached levels consistent with the Committee’s assessment of maximum employment and inflation has risen to 2 percent and is on track to moderately exceed 2 percent for some time. Half of FOMC participants forecast that these favorable economic conditions will be fulfilled by the end of next year  as a result, the median projection for the appropriate level of the federal funds rate lies slightly above the effective lower bound in 2022. Participants generally expect a gradual pace of policy firming that would leave the level of the federal funds rate below estimates of its longer run level through 2024. Of course, these projections do not represent a Committee decision or plan, and no one knows with any certainty where the economy will be a year or more from now. More important than any forecast is the fact that policy will remain accommodative until we have achieved our maximum employment and price stability goals. To conclude, we understand that our actions affect communities, families, and businesses across the country. Everything we do is in service to our public mission. We at the Fed will do everything we can to support the economy for as long as it takes to complete the recovery. Thank you, and I look forward to your questions. . Sure. So the test for beginning our taper is that we’ve achieved substantial further progress toward our goals of [2 percent] inflation and maximum employment. And for inflation, we appear to have achieved more than significant progress—substantial further progress. So that part of the test is achieved, in my view and in the view of many others. So the question is really on the maximum employment test. So if you look at a good number of indicators, you will see that, since last December, when we articulated the test, and the readings today, in many cases more than half of the distance, for example, between the unemployment rate in December of 2020 and typical estimates of the natural rate—50 or 60 percent of that road has been traveled. So that could be substantial further progress. Many on the Committee feel that the “substantial further progress” test for employment has been met. Others feel that it’s close, but they want to see a little more progress. There’s a range of perspectives. I guess my own view would be that the test—the “substantial further progress” test for employment is all but met. And so, once we’ve met those two tests, once the Committee decides that they’ve met [them]—and that could come as soon as the next meeting  that’s the purpose of that language, is to put notice out that that could come as soon as the next meeting. The Committee will consider that test, and we’ll also look at the broader environment at that time and make a decision whether to taper. . Sure. So, as you can see, the inflation forecasts have moved up a bit in the outyears. And that’s really, I think, a reflection of—and they’ve moved up significantly for this year. And that’s, I think, a reflection of the fact that the bottlenecks and shortages that are being—that we’re seeing in the economy have really not begun to abate in a meaningful way yet. So those seem to be going to be with us at least for a few more months and perhaps into next year. So that suggests that inflation’s going to be higher this year, and a number—I guess the inflation rates for next year and 2023 were also marked up, but just by a couple of tenths. Why—those are very modest overshoots. You’re looking at 2.2 and 2.1, you know, two years and three years out. These are very, very—I don’t think that households are going to, you know, notice a couple of tenths of an overshoot. That just happens to be people’s forecasts. You know, we want to foster a strong labor market, and we want to foster inflation averaging 2 percent over time, and I think we’re very much on track to achieve those things. In terms of the framework, I see this as very consistent with the framework. We want inflation expectations to be anchored at around 2 percent. We want, we’re—that’s really the ultimate test of whether we’re getting this done under the framework. And, you know, we do want inflation to run moderately above 2 percent. I wouldn’t put too much on a couple of tenths over 2 percent in 2023 and ’24—one tenth in ’24. But you’re right, those are the numbers. . So let me say that there’s very broad support on the Committee for this plan, both as to the timing and as to the pace of the taper. So this was a unanimous vote today, and I’d say quite broad support for this approach. You’re correct that there are some who would prefer to have gone sooner, and they’ve made their arguments publicly. For some of them, it’s a financial stability concern. And for others, it’s other concerns. They can make their own arguments. This is an approach that the Committee will broadly support, and it will put us having completed our taper sometime around the middle of next year, which seems appropriate. You know, the asset purchases, as I mentioned, were very, very important at the—in the early stages of the crisis. They were essential in restoring market function in the Treasury and other markets. Then, as the recovery got going, they supported aggregate demand, as they will do. And now we’re in a situation where they still have a use, but it’s time for us to begin to taper them. Their usefulness is much less as a tool than it was at the very beginning. And, of course, this leaves the whole question of rate increases ahead, which is really where the framework—the framework is all about how we deal with rate increases and that sort of thing. So we think this is the appropriate way to go. And, again, broad support on the Committee. . Well, so, again, substantial further progress toward our goals is the test for beginning the taper. And the taper takes some months in everyone’s figuring. So you’re going to be well away from satisfying the liftoff test when we begin the taper. So in terms of the liftoff test, though, you know, it’s what we adopted last September. It’s labor market conditions consistent with maximum employment. And while we have interesting signs that, in many ways, the labor market’s very tight, we also have lots of slack in the labor market, and we think that those imbalances will sort themself out. Inflation at 2 percent and on track to achieve it, moderately higher inflation over 2 percent—you know, that really depends on the path of inflation. If inflation remains higher during the course of 2022, then we may already have met that test by the time we reach liftoff. So I just think, if you look at what people are writing down for year end 2022 numbers, some people are writing down very low unemployment rates. And that’s only one indicator, but it suggests a very strong labor market. And I think they’re writing down in good faith what they see as meeting the test. There’s a range of perspectives about where the economy will be, but— by the way, all but one participants have us lifting off during 2023. So it’s not really an unusually wide array of views about this. . So, no, I was not aware of the specifics of what they were doing. So let me just say a couple things about this subject. We understand very well that the trust of the American people is essential for us to effectively carry out our mission. And that’s why I directed the Fed to begin a comprehensive review of the ethics rules around permissible financial holdings and activity by Fed officials. So those rules are, in many respects, the same as those for government agencies, plus a number of things that apply specifically to us because of our business. One of those is—sort of, three things I would point to in terms of specific restrictures. One is, ownership of certain assets is not allowed, and that’s bank securities and other things. Secondly, there are times when we’re not allowed to trade at all or to, you know, buy and sell financial assets. And that’s the period immediately before and during an FOMC meeting. And, third, there’s regular disclosure. So all of these—everyone’s, you know, ownership and activities are all disclosed on an annual basis. So, you know, I would have had to go back and read people’s financial disclosures to know what their activities have been. This has been our framework for a long time, and I guess you’d say it’s served us well. The other thing you would say—that it is now clearly seen as not adequate to the task of really sustaining the public’s trust in us. We need to make changes, and we’re going to do that as a consequence of this. This will be a thoroughgoing and comprehensive review. We’re going to gather all the facts and look at ways to further tighten our rules and standards. . Don’t have a timeline yet  we can start with that. So, well, let me address the muni question, since that’s in there. You know, I personally owned municipal securities for many, many years, and in 2019, I froze that. Meaning I—they’re no—I’m holding all those securities, my wife and I, to maturity. And munis were always thought to be a pretty safe place for a Fed person to invest because, as you know, the lore was that the Fed would never buy municipal securities. So it was not an uncommon thing. And so then comes the, you know, the COVID crisis, and I reversed that policy, and I did it without hesitating. And the reason was that the financial markets, including the municipal financial market, were very much on the verge of collapse. And it was time to go, and we did. But we also checked with the Office of Government Ethics and—who looked carefully at it and said that I didn’t have a conflict. So that’s one answer that I wanted to share with you. Secondly, you’re right, though, as—we’re going to be looking at all those things. I don’t want to get ahead of the process here and speculate about particular outcomes. But this, again, comprehensive and deliberate process—we’re going to make changes. I want to be able to look back on this years from now and know that we rose to meet this challenge and handled the situation well, and that what we did made a lot of sense and protected the public’s interest and the institution that we’re all a part of. . I think that’s a reasonable thing. Yeah, and, of course, for the most part, we don’t. I mean, it was a real coincidence  I happened to pre own these munis. They were bought many years ago, actually. And so we started buying munis as part of the Municipal Liquidity Facility. So it was really not a—it just was an unforeseen event. And I couldn’t sell them, so what I did was, I just held them, checked with the ethics people, and went ahead. So, but as a general principle, yeah, that makes a lot of sense. . So, you’re right, we have a—really, I’ll call it a unique situation where, by many measures, the labor market is tight. And 11 million job openings, very widespread reports from employers all over the economy saying it’s quite difficult to hire people, wages moving up, and that kind—so, quite a tight labor market. So our view, I think— widespread view a few months ago was that several things were coming together in the fall, including kids back to school, which would, you know, which would lighten caregiving duties, including the expiration of unemployment—extra unemployment benefits, and other things would come together to provide an increase in labor supply, and so we’d get out of this strange world where there’re lots of unemployed people and a high unemployment rate but a labor shortage. And so what happened was, Delta happened. And you had this very sharp spike in Delta cases. And I think, so that affects—for example, when schools are open 60 percent of the time or when they’re always at a threat of being closed because of Delta, the Delta variant, you know, you might want to wait. Rather than going ahead and taking a job and starting work only to have to quit it three weeks later, you’re going to wait until you’re confident of that. So some of that may not have happened. Also, people didn’t, you know—as you know, hiring and spending in these face to face service industries, travel and leisure, it just kind of stopped during those months. So we—so that—really, the big shortfall in labor, in jobs, was largely in travel and leisure, and that’s because of—clearly because of Delta. So that all happened. And so what we—we know things that didn’t happen. I think there’s still—it may just be that it’s going to take more time. But it still seems that, inexorably, people will—these are people who were largely working back in February of 2020. They’ll get back to work when it’s time to do that. It just may take a longer time. You’re right, though—it didn’t happen with any force in September, and a lot of that was Delta. In terms of the—you asked also about the test for November. I think if the economy continues to progress broadly in line with expectations, then I think—and also the overall situation is appropriate for this, then I think we could easily move ahead at the next meeting. Or not, depending on whether we feel like that, those tests are met. . So it is, it’s accumulated progress. So, you know, for me, it wouldn’t take a knockout, great, super strong employment report. It would take a reasonably good employment report for me to feel like that test is met. And others on the Committee—many on the Committee feel that the test is already met. Others want to see more progress. And, you know, we’ll work it out as we go. But I would say that, in my own thinking, the test is all but met. So I don’t personally need to see a very strong employment report, but I’d like to see a good—a decent employment report. I mean, it’s not, it’s, again, it’s not to be confused with the test for liftoff, which is so much higher. . Sure. So Dodd Frank created this position, Vice Chair for Supervision, and it’s, there’s actually a specific assignment in the Dodd Frank language, as I’m sure you know. And, effectively, what it means is that the Vice Chair for Supervision is charged with setting the regulatory agenda. And, you know, it’s a specific grant of authority. And in the 10 years, almost, that I’ve been at the Fed, that person has really done that. Dan Tarullo certainly did it, and Vice Chair Quarles did it as well. And I would, I think—I respect that authority. I respect that that’s the person who will set the regulatory agenda going forward, and I would accept that. And, furthermore, you know, it’s fully appropriate to look at—for a new person to come in and look at the current state of regulation and supervision and suggest appropriate changes, and I welcome that. In terms of Vice Chair Quarles’s term, we’re not currently in that situation, and I actually don’t have any updates for you on that today. We’ll keep you posted on that. . Right, so the point of the broad and inclusive goal was not to target a particular unemployment rate for any particular group. Really, we look at a broad range of—a very broad range of metrics when we think about what maximum employment is. And one of the things we look at is unemployment rates and participation rates and wages for different demographic and age groups and that kind of thing. So we will do all of that. So I think if you look back, what were we really thinking? So we all saw the benefits of a strong labor market. If you look at the last two or three years of, before the pandemic hit, you saw—after a lot of long progress, you saw a really strong labor market. And you saw wages at the low end moving up faster than everywhere else—something that’s great to see. We also saw the lowest unemployment rates for minorities of various, you know, for African Americans, for example, and also participation rates. We saw a really, really healthy set of dynamics. And, by the way, we also—there was no reason why it couldn’t continue. There were no imbalances in the economy, and then along came the pandemic. We were not—there was nothing in the economy that looked like a buildup of imbalances that could cause a recession. So I was very much thinking that the country would really benefit from a few more years of this. It would have been—so we’re all quite eager to get back to that. We also said we wouldn’t raise rates just in response to very low unemployment, in the absence of inflation. So that was another aspect of it, because we saw that that really benefited labor market participants in a broad and inclusive way. That’s, of course, not the current situation. We have significant slack in the economy and inflation well above target, not moderately above target. So that’s, really, how we think about it. It isn’t really just targeting the headline numbers, but it’s about taking all of those things into account in your thinking about what constitutes maximum employment. . Well, you really—I mean, first of all, ideally, there wouldn’t be any gap, of course. We would all love to see no such gap. This is a persistent gap, and it’s very hard to explain based on typical metrics. It’s just, it’s quite troubling, but it really is—you know, we have, you know, famously broad and blunt tools. I think eliminating inequality and racial discrimination and racial disparities and that kind of thing is really something that fiscal policy and other policies—frankly, education policies and that kind of thing—are better at focusing on. I think we’ve identified the part that we can do, and we’ll do that part. But I’ve always been clear that it’s going to take policies broadly across society to work on these problems. . So, I missed the first few words, but I think I got your question. So it’s just very important that the debt ceiling be raised in a timely fashion so that the United States can pay its bills when and as they come due. That’s a critically important thing. The failure to do that is something that could result in severe reactions, severe damage to the economy and to the financial markets. And it’s just not something that we could contemplate, that we should contemplate. I’m not going to comment on particular tactics or things like that. I’m just going to say that I think we can all agree that the United States shouldn’t default on any of its obligations—should pay them when and as due. And that, you know, no one should assume that the Fed or anyone else can protect the markets or the economy in the event of a failure—fully protect in the event of a failure to, you know, to make sure that we do pay those debts when they’re due. . You know, I don’t generally ever talk about the conversations I have with elected officials or other appointed officials. But, look, you can see that this is a major focus among those who have responsibility for it, and—including elected people. . So we’re, of course, very closely monitoring Wells Fargo’s efforts to fix its widespread and pervasive problems. They represent a serious matter to us, and the firm is required to remediate them. And we will take appropriate supervisory action if the firm fails to meet our expectation. We continue to hold the firm accountable for its deficiencies with an unprecedented asset cap that will stay in place until the firm has comprehensively fixed its problems. And we’re not going to remove that asset cap until that’s done. So bottom line is, we’ll take strong supervisory action if a firm is engaging in unsafe and unsound practices or violating laws. But I can’t speak to our confidential supervisory assessments of any individual bank. . So these, I don’t need to tell you, we file, people file these reports annually. And I think they were just quite recently filed for 2020. So I don’t have any reason to think people at the Board would have known about particular trading that’s going on. They will see that—there are people at the Fed who see the, you know, see the trading reports when they’re, you know, when they’re annually filed. You know, in terms of having confidence and that sort of thing, I think no one is happy, no one on the FOMC is happy to be in this situation, to be having these questions raised. It’s something we take very, very seriously. This is an important moment for the Fed, and I’m determined that we will rise to the moment and handle it in ways that will stand up over time. I’m very reluctant to get ahead of the process and speculate, though, about different things. And, you know, when we have things to announce, we’ll go ahead and do that, but that’s really what I have for today. . So that’s, yeah, that’s a good question. So, you know, the five year review that we do under this unusual provision of law where all of the Reserve Bank presidents are reviewed for reappointment at the same time every five years, that is really a broad review about their leadership of the institution, their performance on the FOMC, all of those things. And if there were a concern—a public concern or a private concern—about something that someone had done, we wouldn’t wait for the five year. We wouldn’t wait that day if there were concerns. You’re right, though, these—as I mentioned, we have had a framework for a long time, and it’s similar to what other government agencies have, only it’s a little stricter. And it is that you can trade financial instruments, but not specific ones like bank debt. You can’t trade during the FOMC period and during the meeting—the blackout period and then during the meeting. And then you disclose all this, and we have disclosed it for years. So all of these things have been going—to the extent they’ve been going on, they’ve been a matter of public record. And, you know—but, nonetheless—so that—you know, it was seeming to work just okay. And now you look at it, and you see this, and you think, “We need to do better.” And we will. But you’re right, but it has not been part of the process. And, appropriately, I don’t think it should have been. I mean, I wouldn’t blame the people who conduct that review. I really think, if someone had raised concerns or if we’d had concerns, then it would have been, but it wouldn’t have been part of that process. It would have been raised instantly, rather than once every five years. . Well, let me say one thing. You’re looking for conditions consistent with maximum employment to lift off, and those conditions can change over time. So you’re not necessarily bound by a particular level of the unemployment rate or the participation rate or anything else like that, which can change over time. But more to your point, really, we actually have a paragraph in our framework, and something like this has been there for a long time. It’s, I think it’s paragraph six. And you’re talking about a situation in which the two goals are not complementary  they’re somehow in tension. And if we judge that’s effect—that is the case, what it says is, we take into account the employment shortfalls and inflation deviations and the potentially different time horizons over which employment and inflation are projected to return to levels judged consistent with the mandate. So, we used to call that the balanced approach paragraph because it had those words. So it’s a very difficult situation for any central bank to be—pardon me—to be in a situation where the two goals are in tension. And that paragraph tries to address it by saying we would sort of weigh the equities between the two. How long will it take, and how big are the gaps, and that kind of thing. We don’t really think we’re in that—we’re sort of in that situation, I’d say, in a short term way. But we think, we do expect that this is sort of—because of the COVID shock and the reopening and all that, you’re seeing this temporarily. . About the United States, no. Corporate defaults are very low in the United States right now. Corporate leverage built up over the course of the long expansion that ended with the pandemic. We were very concerned in the last year or so. We were concerned in the last year or so, and then I’d say very concerned at the beginning of the pandemic that, if you’ve got a highly leveraged company and your revenue stops for an uncertain period, as things happened at the beginning of the crisis, we were very concerned that there would be a wave of defaults. It didn’t happen, potentially—I mean, to a significant extent because of the CARES Act and the response that we undertook and all that. It was a, you know, a much stronger response than we’ve ever had. And I think for whatever reason now, you have very, very low default rates now among corporate debt. You know, the Evergrande situation seems very particular to China, which has very high debt for an emerging market economy, really the highest that any emerging market economy has had. And the government has been working to get that under control. This is part of that effort. The government put new strictures in place for highly leveraged companies. And Evergrande is dealing with those strictures, and it’s something they’re managing. In terms of the implications for us, there isn’t, there’s not a lot of direct United States exposure. The big Chinese banks are not tremendously exposed. But, you know, you would worry that it would affect global financial conditions through confidence channels and that kind of thing. But I wouldn’t draw a parallel to the United States corporate sector. . I think the phrase goes: “I have nothing for you on that today.” Sorry. I’m focused on doing my job— . —I’m focused on doing my job every day for the American people, and I don’t have any comment on that, Brian. . So my thinking on this has been: Let’s get through the taper decision, and then let’s turn to those issues. There are a number of related issues that—you mentioned one, Greg, but, you know, and—which you need to start to think about, and we’ll do that. But I want to get, we want to get through this taper decision, and then turn to those issues, rather than start, you know, thinking about them now and having the minutes discuss them and get people thinking that we are, you know, focused on those issues, because we’re really not. And, you know, we do have the experience of what we did last time. We’ve watched other countries and what they’ve done. So I think we’ll be able to get to sensible decisions fairly expeditiously when it’s time. But it’s just not time yet, in my thinking. . So within—let’s just take the household surveys generally. The New York Fed survey, let me talk about that specifically, and this is from the New York Fed. It’s only an eight year old survey, and it does seem as though the, they’re looking three years out. And it seems like there’s a high correlation between three year and one year. For the most part, surveys are showing that households expect higher inflation in the near term but not in the longer term. And that’s also what expectations are showing. So there are many, many different inflation measures, of course. And that’s why we have this thing called the CIE, which is the, it’s an index of—it’s market based measures, it’s professional forecasters, and it’s household surveys. And you just put them all—it’s not, you know, it doesn’t have a lot of grand theory about it. You put them all in, and you measure the change. So you should be—and, also, you measure things like the dispersion and that sort of thing, so you can look at all that. And, you know, it tells a story of inflation expectations moving up. Many of the different measures will also show inflation expectations moving back up to where they were in, say, 2013, which was before the really—the drop in inflation expectations broadly happened in ’14 and ’15—around then. So that’s not a troubling thing. But, you know, inflation expectations are terribly important. We spend a lot of time watching them. And if we did see them moving up in a troubling way and running persistently above levels that are really consistent with our mandate, then, you know, we would certainly react to that. But we don’t really see that now. We see more of a moderate increase that is—the first part of which is welcome. And because, you know, inflation expectations had drifted down, and it was good to see them get back up a bit. But, again, we watch carefully. . That’s not my expectation. Of course, we can always—we haven’t decided to taper yet, and we haven’t decided the pace yet. So, you know, it’s not my expectation that we would have to. We can certainly speed up or slow down the taper if we—if it becomes appropriate, though. Absolutely. In fact, back in ’13, when we tapered, we always said we weren’t on a preset course. I think this will be a shorter period. The economy’s much farther along than it was when we tapered in 2013. So it makes sense to allow the runoff to happen. It’s a very gradual taper. It will be when we agree on it. And, but we certainly have the freedom to either speed it up or slow it down if that becomes appropriate. . You wouldn’t, no, because, you know, when you’re—as long as you’re buying assets, you’re adding accommodation, and it wouldn’t make any sense to, you know, then lift off. I mean, what you would do is, you’d speed up the taper, I think, if that were the situation you’re in. Not—we don’t expect to be in that situation, but I do think it would be wiser at that point to go ahead and speed up the taper, just because the two are then working in the same direction. . Thank you. . Sure, I’d be glad to. So we think it’s really important that the central bank maintain a stable currency and payment system for the public’s benefit. That’s one of our jobs. We also live in a time of transformational innovation around digital payments, and we need to make sure that the Fed is able to continue to deliver to the public a stable and trustworthy currency and payment system. So there’s extensive private innovation, a lot of which is taking place outside the regulatory perimeter. And innovation is fantastic. Our economy runs on innovation. But where the public’s money is concerned, we need to make sure that appropriate regulatory protections are in place, and today they really are not in some cases. So with that in mind and with the creation of myriad private currencies and currency like products, we’re working proactively to evaluate whether to issue a CBDC and, if so, in what form. We have two broad workstreams, one of which is really technology, both at the Board and in the Federal Reserve Bank of Boston’s work with MIT—the other of which is to identify, scope out, deal with, analyze the various public policy issues. As you mentioned, we do intend to publish a discussion paper soon that will be the basis for a period of public engagement— engagement with many different groups, including elected officials, around these issues. We think it’s our obligation to do the work, both on technology and public policy, to form a basis for making an informed decision. The ultimate test we’ll apply when assessing a central bank digital currency and other digital innovations is: Are there clear and tangible benefits that outweigh any costs and risks? We’re also, as you know, investing heavily right now in building a new settlement system for instant payments in the U.S. It’ll be the first such major expansion of our core payment system since the 1970s. We found the case for this quite compelling—for consumers, businesses, and just ensuring that all financial institutions have access to that payment system. So, bottom line, we haven’t made a decision about the CBDC, but we will be issuing a discussion paper soon in order to form the basis of this public interaction that we’ll have. Thank you very much. . I think it’s important that we get to a place where we can make an informed decision about this and do so expeditiously. I don’t think we’re behind. I think it’s more important to do this right than to do it fast. We are the world’s reserve currency. And I think we’re in a good place to make that analysis and make that decision—by the way, which will be a governmentwide decision. We would do this, we would have to have a meeting of the minds with the Administration and also probably with Congress. We would really like to have broad support for this. It’s a very important innovation. And I think we would need that to go ahead, and that’s the process we’re engaged in. Thanks very much.

****FOMCpresconf20211103

. Good afternoon. At the Federal Reserve, we are strongly committed to achieving the monetary policy goals that Congress has given us: maximum employment and price stability. Today, the FOMC kept interest rates near zero and, in light of the progress the economy has made toward our goals, decided to begin reducing the pace of asset purchases. With these actions, monetary policy will continue to provide strong support to the economic recovery. Given the unprecedented nature of the disruptions related to the pandemic and the reopening of the economy, we remain attentive to risks and will ensure that our policy is well positioned to address the full range of plausible economic outcomes. I will say more about our monetary policy decisions after reviewing recent economic developments. Economic activity expanded at a 6.5 percent pace in the first half of the year, reflecting progress on vaccinations, the reopening of the economy, and strong policy support. In the third quarter, real GDP growth slowed notably from this rapid pace. The summer’s surge in COVID cases from the Delta variant has held back the recovery in the sectors most adversely affected by the pandemic, including travel and leisure. Activity has also been restrained by supply constraints and bottlenecks, notably in the motor vehicle industry. As a result, both household spending and business investment flattened out last quarter. Nonetheless, aggregate demand has been very strong this year, buoyed by fiscal and monetary policy support and the healthy financial positions of households and businesses. With COVID case counts receding further and progress on vaccinations, economic growth should pick up this quarter, resulting in strong growth for the year as a whole. Conditions in the labor market have continued to improve, and demand for workers remains very strong. As with overall economic activity, the pace of improvement slowed with the rise in COVID cases. In August and September, job gains averaged 280,000 per month, down from an average of about 1 million jobs per month in June and July. The slowdown has been concentrated in sectors most sensitive to the pandemic, including leisure and hospitality and education. The unemployment rate was 4.8 percent in September. This figure understates the shortfall in employment, particularly as participation in the labor market remains subdued. Some of the softness in participation likely reflects the aging of the population and retirements. But participation for prime aged individuals also remains well below pre pandemic levels—in part reflecting factors related to the pandemic, such as caregiving needs and ongoing concerns about the virus. As a result, employers are having difficulties filling job openings. These impediments to labor supply should diminish with further progress on containing the virus—supporting gains in employment and economic activity. The economic downturn has not fallen equally on all Americans, and those least able to shoulder the burden have been hardest hit. Despite progress, joblessness continues to fall disproportionately on African Americans and Hispanics. The supply and demand imbalances related to the pandemic and the reopening of the economy have contributed to sizable price increases in some sectors. In particular, bottlenecks and supply chain disruptions are limiting how quickly production can respond to the rebound in demand in the near term. As a result, overall inflation is running well above our 2 percent longer run goal. Supply constraints have been larger and longer lasting than anticipated. Nonetheless, it remains the case that the drivers of higher inflation have been predominantly connected to the dislocations caused by the pandemic—specifically, the effects on supply and demand from the shutdown, the uneven reopening, and the ongoing effects of the virus itself. We understand the difficulties that high inflation poses for individuals and families, particularly those with limited means to absorb higher prices for essentials such as food and transportation. Our tools cannot ease supply constraints. Like most forecasters, we continue to believe that our dynamic economy will adjust to the supply and demand imbalances and that, as it does, inflation will decline to levels much closer to our 2 percent longer run goal. Of course, it is very difficult to predict the persistence of supply constraints or their effects on inflation. Global supply chains are complex  they will return to normal function, but the timing of that is highly uncertain. We are committed to our longer run goal of 2 percent inflation and to having longer term inflation expectations well anchored at this goal. If we were to see signs that the path of inflation, or [of] longer term inflation expectations, was moving materially and persistently beyond levels consistent with our goal, we would use our tools to preserve price stability. We will be watching carefully to see whether the economy is evolving in line with expectations. The Fed’s policy actions have been guided by our mandate to promote maximum employment and stable prices for the American people, along with our responsibilities to promote the stability of the financial system. Our asset purchases have been a critical tool. They helped preserve financial stability early in the pandemic and since then have helped foster smooth market functioning and accommodative financial conditions to support the economy. Last December, the Committee stated its intention to continue asset purchases at a pace of at least $120 billion per month until substantial further progress has been made toward our maximum employment and price stability goals. At today’s meeting, the Committee judged that the economy has met this test, and decided to begin reducing the pace of its asset purchases. Beginning later this month, we will reduce the monthly pace of our net asset purchases by $10 billion for Treasury securities and $5 billion for agency mortgage backed securities. We also announced another reduction of this size in the monthly purchase pace starting in mid  December, since that month’s purchase schedule will be released by the Federal Reserve Bank of New York prior to our December FOMC meeting. If the economy evolves broadly as expected, we judge that similar reductions in the pace of net asset purchases will likely be appropriate each month, implying that increases in our securities holdings would cease by the middle of next year. That said, we are prepared to adjust the pace of purchases if warranted by changes in the economic outlook. And even after our balance sheet stops expanding, our holdings of securities will continue to support accommodative financial conditions. Our decision today to begin tapering our asset purchases does not imply any direct signal regarding our interest rate policy. We continue to articulate a different and more stringent test for the economic conditions that would need to be met before raising the federal funds rate. To conclude, we understand that our actions affect communities, families, and businesses across the country. Everything we do is in service to our public mission. We at the Fed will do everything we can to complete the recovery in employment and achieve our price stability goal. Thank you. I look forward to your questions. . So I would say it this way. We try to focus on what we can control—and that is how to communicate as clearly as possible, in this highly uncertain world, how we’re thinking about the economic outlook and the balance of risks and how policy will evolve in that case and also in the cases, which are frequent, where the economy evolves in unexpected ways. So the focus at this meeting is on tapering asset purchases, not on raising rates. It is time to taper, we think, because the economy has achieved substantial further progress toward our goals, measured from last December. We don’t think it’s time yet to raise interest rates. There is still ground to cover to reach maximum employment, both in terms of employment and in terms of participation. Getting to your question, our baseline expectation is that supply bottlenecks and shortages will persist well into next year, and elevated inflation as well, and that, as the pandemic subsides, supply chain bottlenecks will abate—and job growth will move back up. And as that happens, inflation will decline from today’s elevated levels. Of course, the timing of that is highly uncertain. But, certainly, we should see inflation moving down by the second or third quarter. The time for lifting rates and beginning to remove accommodation will depend on the path of the economy. We think we can be patient. If a response is called for, we will not hesitate. So, what I will tell you is, we will be watching carefully to see whether the economy evolves in line with our expectations, and policy will adapt appropriately. And that’s what I would say. . So if you look at the progress that we’ve made over the course of the last year, if that pace were to continue, then the answer would be: “Yes, I do think that that is possible.” Of course, we measure maximum employment based on a wide range of figures, but it’s certainly within the realm of possibility. . So wages have been moving up strongly, very strongly. And, in particular, I would point to the employment compensation index reading that we got last Friday. Now, in real terms, they’ve been—they had been running a little bit below inflation, so real wages were not really increasing. I think, with the ECI reading, it becomes close to maybe not increasing, but close to back to zero in terms of the real increase. So wages moving up, of course, is how standard of living increases over the years for generation upon generation. It’s very important, and it’s generally a good thing. You know, the concern is a somewhat unusual case where, if wages were to be rising persistently and materially above inflation and productivity gains, that could put upward pressure on, or downward pressure on margins and cause companies to—or employers, really—to raise prices as a result, and you can see yourself, find yourself in what we used to call a wage–price spiral. We don’t have evidence of that yet. Productivity has been very high. The ECI reading is just one reading. Again, if you look back, we—so we’ll be watching this carefully. But I would say that, at this point, we don’t see troubling increases in wages. And we don’t expect those to emerge, but we’ll be watching carefully. . Yes. So I’m not sure I totally got your first question, but I would say—in fact, could you just quickly, succinctly, say your first question again? . Yes, so, you know, this isn’t the traditional Phillips curve situation where there’s a direct tradeoff, where that’s really what we’re talking about. The inflation that we’re seeing is really not due to a tight labor market. It’s due to bottlenecks, and it’s due to shortages, and it’s due to very strong demand meeting those. So I think it’s not the classical situation where you have that precise tradeoff. But, you know, in this situation, we do have a provision in our Statement on Longer Run Goals, as you know, that says when those two things are in tension, what we do is, we take into account the employment shortfalls and inflation deviations and the potentially different time horizons over which employment and inflation are projected to return to levels judged consistent with the mandate. So we used to call that the “balanced approach” paragraph. We have to think about the amount of the deviation, we have to think about the time it will take, and we have to make policy in a world where the two goals are in tension. It’s very difficult. But what it really boils down to is something that’s common sense. And that is risk management. We have to be aware of the risks that we’re—particularly now the risk of significantly higher inflation. We see shortages and bottlenecks persisting into next year, well into next year. We see higher inflation persisting, and we have to be in position to address that risk should it become really a threat to—should it create a threat of more persistent, longer term inflation. And that’s what we think our policy is doing now. It’s putting us in a position to be able to address the range of plausible outcomes. . So I guess, as I said in my opening remarks, assuming the economy performs broadly as expected, the Committee judges that similar reductions in the pace of net asset purchases will likely be appropriate each month, and we’re prepared to deviate from that path if warranted by changes in the economic outlook. So I’m not going to give you a lot more detail on what that might be. Of course, if we do see something like that happening, if it becomes a question, then we’ll communicate very transparently and openly about that. But I’m just going to leave it with the words that are in the statement. Sorry, was there a second part? . You know, I would just leave you with the words we have here. We are prepared to speed up or slow down the pace of reductions in asset purchases if it’s warranted by changes in the economic outlook. And, again, if we feel like something like that’s happening, then we’ll be very transparent about it. We wouldn’t want to surprise markets. We’ll say, in light of this factor or these factors, we are considering doing this, and then we would either do it or not do it. But so—but I’m not going to, you know, start making up examples of what that might be today. Thanks. . Yes. So, first of all, it is our job to—and we accept responsibility and accountability for inflation in the medium term. We’re accountable to Congress and to the American people for maximum employment and price stability. The level of inflation we have right now is not at all consistent with price stability. By the way, we’re also not at maximum employment, as I mentioned. So I would want to assure people that we will use our tools as appropriate to get inflation under control. We don’t think it’s a good time to raise interest rates, though, because we want to see the labor market heal further. And we have very good reason to think that that will happen as the Delta variant declines, so—which it’s doing now. So “transitory” is a word that people have had different understandings of. For some, it carries a sense of “short lived,” and that’s, you know, there’s a real time component—measured in months, let’s say. Really, for us, what “transitory” has meant is that if something is transitory, it will not leave behind it permanently or very persistently higher inflation. So that’s why we, you know, we took a step back from “transitory.” We said “expected to be transitory,” first of all, to show uncertainty around that—we’ve always said that, by the way, in other contexts  we just hadn’t done it in the statement—but also to acknowledge, really, that it means different things to different people. And then we added some language to really explain more what we’re talking about in paragraph two and paragraph three. We said that “supply and demand imbalances related to the pandemic and the reopening of the economy have contributed to sizable price increases,” and we said, “Progress on vaccinations and an easing of supply constraints are expected to support continued gains in economic activity and employment as well as a reduction in inflation.” So we’re trying to explain what we mean and also acknowledging more uncertainty about “transitory.” So it’s, I mean, it’s become a word that’s attracted a lot of attention that maybe is distracting from our message, which we want to be as clear as possible. Ultimately, the only other thing I would say is, look, we understand completely that it’s particularly people who are living paycheck to paycheck or seeing higher grocery costs, higher gasoline costs—when the winter comes, higher heating costs for their homes. We understand completely what they’re going through. And, you know, we will use our tools over time to make sure that that doesn’t become a permanent feature of life. Really, that’s one of our principal jobs, along with achieving maximum employment. And that’s our commitment. . Thanks. So maximum employment is, it’s a broad—what would we say?—broad based and inclusive goal that’s not directly measurable and changes over time due to various factors. You can’t specify a specific goal. So it’s taking into account quite a broad range of things, and, of course, employment—levels of employment—[and] participation are a part of that. But, in addition, there are other measures of what’s going on in the labor market, like wages is a key measure of how tight the labor market is—the level of quits, the amount of job openings, the flows in and out of various states. So we look at so many different things, and you make an overall judgment. Now, the temptation at the beginning of the recovery was to look at the data in February of 2020 and say, well, that’s the goal because we didn’t know any—that’s what we knew. We knew that was achievable in a context of low inflation. I think we’re in a, you know, we’re learning that. We have to be humble about what we know about this economy, which is still very, you know, COVID affected, by the way. A lot of what we’re seeing in the last 90 days is because of Delta. We were on a path to a very different place. Delta put us on a different path. And we see these things. But, so I think we’re going to have to—ideally, we would have, we would see further development of the labor market in a context where there isn’t another COVID spike, and then we would be able to see, I think, a lot. We would see whether—how does participation react in that world, in that sort of post COVID world? Right now, people are staying out of the labor market because of caretaking [and] because of fear of COVID to a significant extent. You know, we thought that schools reopening and elapsing unemployment benefits would produce some sort of additional labor supply. That doesn’t seem to have been the case, interestingly. So I think there’s room for a whole lot of humility here, as we try to think about what maximum employment would be. We’re going to have to see some time post COVID so that we know—or post Delta, anyway—to see what is possible. And I think the learning for those of us who lived through the last cycle is that, over time, you can get to places that didn’t look possible. Now, what we also have now, though, is, we have high inflation. So we have a completely different situation now where we have high inflation, and we have to balance that with what’s going on in the employment market. So it’s a complicated situation, and I would say, we will, we hope to achieve significantly greater clarity about where this economy is going and what the characteristics of the post pandemic economy are over the first half of next year. . Sorry, the two tests? . That’s a decision for the Committee. I would put it to you this way. When we reach maximum employment, when we reach a state where labor market conditions are at maximum employment in the Committee’s judgment, it’s very possible that the inflation test will already be met. We’re aware that that language sounds, it sounds a little out of touch with what’s going on, but, you know, we’re not at maximum employment. When that is the case, we’ll look to see whether the inflation test is met, and there’s a good chance that it will be if you look at how inflation has evolved in the last year and a half. . What I’m really saying is, that question is not before us right now. You know, we had the question on when to taper. We’ve now answered that question and the speed of it and all that. We have not focused on whether we meet the liftoff test, because we don’t meet the liftoff test now because we’re not at maximum employment. What I’m saying is, given where inflation is and where it’s projected to be, let’s say we do meet the maximum employment test. Then the Committee—the question for the Committee at that time will be, has the inflation test been met? And, you know, I don’t want to get ahead of the Committee on that, but the answer may very well be “Yes, it’s been met.” But we’re not asking that question today, because we’re not running a liftoff test. We’re not evaluating the liftoff test today. We didn’t have that discussion at today’s meeting. We did talk about the economy and the development of the economy, but we didn’t ask ourselves whether the liftoff test is met, because, you know, it’s clearly not met on the maximum employment side. . So we don’t actually define maximum employment as—we define it in terms of inflation, but, of course, there is a connection there. Maximum employment has to be a level that is consistent with stable prices. But that’s not really how we think about it. We think about maximum employment as looking at a broad range of things. You can’t just look at— unlike inflation, where you can have a number. But with maximum employment, you could be in a situation, hypothetically, where the unemployment rate is low, but there are many people who are out of the labor force and will come back in. And so you wouldn’t really be at maximum employment, because there’s this group that isn’t counted as unemployed. So we look at a range of things. So the thing is, by many measures, we are at a very tight labor market. I mentioned quits and job openings and wages and things. Many of them are signaling a tight labor market, but the issue is, how persistent is that? Because you have people who are held out of the labor market, you know, of their own—they’re holding themselves out of the labor market because of caretaking needs or because of fear of COVID, or, for whatever reason, they’re staying out. And it’s clear that there are, you know—with tremendous demand for workers and wages moving up, it does seem like we’re set up to go back to a higher job  creation rate. So that would suggest that you’re not at maximum employment. So, at the end of the day, it is a judgment thing. But, of course, at the end of it, it also has to be a level of employment that’s consistent with price stability. . Yes. I mean, again, it’s a risk management thing. It’s not—I can’t reduce it to an equation, but, ultimately, it’s about risk management. So you want to be in a position to act, to cover the full range of plausible outcomes, not just the base case. And in this case, the risk is skewed. For now, it appears to be skewed toward higher inflation. So we need to be in a position to act in case it becomes necessary to do so or appropriate to do so, and we think we will be. So that’s how we’re thinking about it. And I think, though, that, judgmentally, too, it’s appropriate to be patient. It’s appropriate for us to see what the labor market and what the economy look like when they heal further. We know that we were on a path to a different place, as I mentioned, when Delta arrived. And Delta stopped, it stopped job creation. It stopped that transition away from a goods focused economy where there’s excess demand for goods because there—services are not available. People are not traveling. That transition itself could help bring inflation down, because, presumably, people would spend a little less on goods while they start spending more on travel and all sorts of travel services and things like that. So we want to see that healthy process unfold as we decide what the true state of the economy is, and we think it will evolve in a way that will mean lower inflation. Bottlenecks should be abating. We start to see that now with some of them, but, overall, they haven’t gotten better overall, and, you know, we’re very aware of that. So that’s really how we’re thinking about it. We’re thinking that time will tell us more. In the meantime, we don’t think it’s time to raise rates now. You know, if we do conclude that it’s necessary to do so, then we’ll be patient, but we won’t hesitate. . So that’s not a decision for bank regulators or for any agency. That’s a decision for elected representatives. So we feel that any role that we have—and we do think we have a role in climate change. It relates to our existing mandates, and our existing mandates are, really, prudential regulation of financial institutions. We expect them, and the public will expect us to expect them, to understand and be in a position to manage their risks. So that’s physical risk, and it’s transition risk for climate. And, by the way, the large financial institutions are doing this already, and, you know, we think that’s right within our mandate. There’s also a financial stability question, the overall stability of the financial system. And so, from that standpoint, we can do research. We can try to help understand what will the pathways be through which climate change effects the economy—both physical risk and transition risk. That’s what we can do, and that’s what we will do. And we’ll do it well. Within the frame of our existing mandates, we’ll do it well. We’re not the people who will decide the national strategy on climate change. That has to be elected people, and not so much us. We feel like we have that narrow mandate, and we will do it well. . So we, you know, we—let me just say that this system, the ethics system we had in place had been in place for decades and had, as far as we know, served us well, and then that was no longer the case. And so we had no moment of denial about that. As a group, we stepped in, and we took the actions that we took. And, you know, within one FOMC cycle, we announced a new set of rules to, you know, to try to put us back where we need to be, which is, we need to have the complete trust of the American people that we’re working in their interest all the time—absolutely critical to our work, as it is for any government agency. And I feel like this called that into question. So we reacted, I would characterize it, strongly and forcefully. If there were other things that we could do that were reasonable, we would certainly do them. So you asked me about blind trusts. You know, the overall authority for ethics around these issues in the federal government is the Office of Government Ethics, OGE. And they have a long held position which is not favorable to blind trusts. They do not encourage them. They don’t think they’re effective. They think they’re cumbersome. And they think there are better ways to get at the things that need to be done. And those are the things that we’re actually doing. So I don’t know that there are any blind trusts, for that reason, because they are the, they’re the regulator. They say this on their website, if you look. In terms of laws broken, you know, I asked the inspector general to look to see whether there were rules broken and whether there were laws broken, and I won’t speculate on that. But that is with the inspector general now and, of course, out of my hands. . Well, so, let me say what’s happened—and we’re very, very straightforward about it—is that inflation has come in higher than expected, and bottlenecks have been more persistent and more prevalent. We see that just like everybody else does, and we see that they’re now on track to persist well into next year. That was not expected—not expected by us, not expected by other macro forecasters. Now, let me say, you know, it’s difficult enough to just forecast the economy in normal times. When you’re talking about, you know, global supply chains in turmoil, it’s a whole different thing. And you’re talking about a pandemic that’s holding people out of the labor force for reasons that we can sample, but we don’t have a lot of experience with this. So it’s very, very difficult to forecast and not easy to set policy. So we have to set policy, though. So that’s what we’re doing. And, you know, so, to look at your question this way, I don’t think that we’re behind the curve. I actually believe that policy is well positioned to address the range of plausible outcomes, and that’s what we need to do. I do think it would be premature to raise rates today. That’s not—I don’t think that’s controversial. Certainly, I don’t know anyone arguing for that today. And the reason is that there’s still ground to cover to get to maximum employment. And we don’t want to stop that when there’s good reason to think—there’s still good reason to think, although it’s been delayed, clearly, there’s good reason to think that the economy will reopen, particularly if we do get past, you know, significant outbreaks of COVID. That’s when we’re really going to see what the characteristics of the labor market are. And, you know, I think, you know, the bottlenecks that we’re seeing in global supply chains around goods and, frankly, now at our own domestic ports, because demand is stronger than the capacity of those ports—those things are going to work themselves out. We have a flexible economy. It’ll take some time, but, you know, it took—you know, the experts managed to create a vaccine faster than, certainly, than I expected. And I think this stuff will work itself out over the course of next year. That is my baseline understanding, and that’s a very widely held one among people. But, you know, we are prepared for different eventualities, and we will use our tools to achieve price stability and maximum employment. And we’re going to let the data lead us to where we need to go. Our policy will adapt—and has already adapted—to the changing understanding of inflation and of bottlenecks and the whole supply side story—which is also partly a demand story. So our policy will continue to adapt as is appropriate. . The economy is in quite a different place than when we tapered back in, I guess it was, 2013. We were much farther away from maximum employment. Inflation was much lower. This is an economy where demand is very, very strong, very strong, and job openings substantially exceed the number of unemployed people. So the need for further stimulus is far less than it was in 2013, where we still had quite a ways to go. I mean, after we began that taper, it was still many years before we reached what I would characterize as conditions consistent with maximum employment, let alone price stability. So this is quite a different situation, and, you know, the Committee unanimously felt today that we had met the test that we’d articulated, and this was appropriate. And this is faster than, you know, than what people had expected six months ago. It’s earlier and faster, and that’s because our, as I mentioned, our policy has been adapting to the situation as it evolves, as it’s clarifying itself, and that’s partly because we see inflation coming in higher—so. . Sure. So in terms of the balance sheet, those questions that you mention—we haven’t gone back to them. Now that we’ve tapered, I expect that that’s exactly what we’ll do in coming meetings. And we’ll do it in an orderly fashion, and we’ll talk about reinvestment and all those things. And we don’t have to make decisions on those yet. But, you know, typically, when we’re doing a new subject like that, we’ll have a series of briefings and discussions. And that’s what we will now begin to do. In terms of the effect of asset purchases on the economy, so, there’s a tremendous amount of research and scholarship on this. And, you know, you can kind of—you can find different people coming out with different views. But I would say, the most mainstream view would be that you’re at the effective lower bound, so how do you affect longer term rates? There are two ways. One, so you can’t lower rates—let’s say you can’t lower rates any further, hypothetically. So you can give forward guidance. You can say, we’re going to keep the rates low for a period of time, either [for] a specific period, [or] until certain conditions are met. The markets will do the math, and that’ll have an effect on longer term borrowings even, you know, 10, 30 years out kind of thing. So that’s one thing. The other thing you can do is, you just go buy those securities, buy longer term securities. That will drive down longer term rates and hold them lower, and, you know, rates right across the, right across the rate spectrum matter for borrowers. So lower rates encourage more borrowing, encourage more economic activity. People—you can service your debt. You have more free cash flow. You know, it’s not different from what we do at the short end. So that was discussed long before anybody did it. That was—I think Milton Friedman said that that was what you could do if you were pinned at the lower bound, many, many years ago. So, anyway, that’s how it’s supposed to work. And, you know, it’s quite hard to be precise about these things because, you know, you only have one economy, and you can’t run two different economies right next to each other and do a scientific experiment. But most people find—most of the findings are that it does support economic activity in the way that you would expect, which is to say, at the margin, more economic activity with lower rates, which is why we do what we do. More accommodative financial conditions lead to more economic activity, over time, with a lag. So I think that’s the main finding I would say on QE. . So I’m not going to—I won’t have any—I will answer your question, Paul, but I’m not going to have any comment whatsoever on the renomination process at all. . I will say, though, that I have briefed Administration officials, and I’ve briefed people on Capitol Hill in detail about what we did and why we did it, and seeking their feedback, getting their reaction. But, you know, this is—part of my job is—Congress has oversight over the Fed, and we take that very seriously. So if you’re on our, one of the two committees that has oversight over us, then I’m in regular contact with you, probably. And, you know, when something like this comes up, I’m on the phone. I’m offering to meet with you and explain it to you and answer your questions and identify any concerns people might have. That’s just part of my job. So I do that. I don’t talk about particular conversations. But you can assume I’ll always do that. And I certainly did it in this case. . So I don’t have anything for you on supplemental leverage ratio right now. We are looking at ways to, if there are ways we can address liquidity issues through that channel. We’re also—we also have a—there’s a working group headed by [the] Treasury about, over Treasury [securities] markets, and what happened in the acute phase of the pandemic, and what structural things may need to be done. So that would be part of that workstream, and I know that there’s a lot going on. I’m not sure when that report will be out. So it’s work under way. That’s one of the many issues that are part of that, along with things like central clearing of Treasuries, greater central clearing, and, you know, many other ideas. It’s important that we have a liquid Treasury [securities] market. It’s a huge public benefit that we do, and, you know, I think we need to do those things that enable that, you know, while also assuring the safety and soundness of our largest financial institutions, who tend to be the main dealers. So we have to make sure that that’s always a first order of concern as well.  You know, I think it’s too soon to say what the reputational damage is. I think, from the very beginning, my reaction was: We need to deal with this straightforwardly, transparently, and forcefully. And that’s what we’re going to do. I mean, it’s, it means everything to me that we do whatever it takes to make sure that nothing like this happens again, and I like to think we’ve made a real good start on that. If you think about it, you cannot execute a trade unless it’s precleared, and then you have to say, “Execute.” It’s not even a trade. Really, there’s no trading going on. This is for investment and, you know, getting liquidity for life’s expenses. But you then have to wait 45 days to actually execute that sale or purchase. So I think it’s a pretty good system. We’ll always be looking to make it better. So in terms of our independence, you know, look, I think we will address this, and I think we have. And I like to think it’s enough, but it’s going to, you know—we’re just beginning to implement it. We have to write the rules, which we’re doing, you know, as quickly as possible. We need more people. We’re going to have to resource this much more significantly here at the Board, and also, we’re going to need appropriate technology, because, you know, the Fed has more than—the System has more than 30,000 employees. Not all of them, far few of them, will be covered by this, but the senior officers, who will be covered by this, will, you know, will have to have technology access, and it’s going to have to work efficiently. So there’s a lot of work to do to implement. You know, again, I would just say, this system has been in place for decades. And it was in place when I took over. It was in place for the last, at least the last three or four Chairs. And, you know, it was what it was. And, you know, it proved to have weaknesses in it. And part of that was, it wasn’t uniformly enforced across the System. I’m a big believer in the value of the Federal Reserve System and the Reserve Banks. But you had 12 different ethics officers at 12 different Banks. And you had ethics people here. And, you know, compliance wasn’t, it wasn’t all exactly the same. It was a little bit different and uneven, and also, the rules were— you know, we didn’t imagine the problems that happened. And they may have actually been—I don’t know this—but they may actually have been in compliance with the specifics of our rules. They were clearly not in compliance with the part of our rules that said, don’t do anything that would create that appearance. I mean, that’s clear. This was a bad appearance. So, anyway, what can we do? We are where we are. It happened, and we just have to deal with it forthrightly and transparently and “own” it and step up to this, you know, meet this moment. I’m totally committed to doing that. And, again, if there are better ideas, I’d love to hear them, but I think we have so far made a good start. . I’m not going to answer who I spoke to at all. I just, I’m not going to give you any names, so don’t take that as a “yes” or “no.” I’m just not going to start down that road. . Yes. So, what’s happening is, people are leaving their jobs. They’re quitting their jobs in all time high numbers—but, in many cases, going back into employment and getting higher wages. So a lot of the higher wages you’re seeing are for job switchers rather than incumbents. So that’s just, that’s a sign of a really strong labor market, as opposed to people just running off and quitting. There have also been—there are a significant number of retirements, and we’ll just have to see what that means. So, toward the end of the last cycle, which was the longest in our recorded economic history, we did see labor force participation moving up well above what economists estimate was the trend, and part of that was people staying in the labor force or just not retiring at the rates they were expected to retire. So maybe this was just catch up on that. I am a believer that, over time, you won’t know how far—you won’t know what can happen with labor force participation in advance. You’re just going to have to give it some time, because we saw that over and over again. There are things that we can, where we can say, you know, this is where the limit is. Labor force participation is a much more flexible subject for me, and so I do think we need to be humble about what the limits are of labor force participation. But we expect labor force participation to pick up. We don’t know the pace at which it will do so. So in terms of full employment, as I discussed earlier, I think, at the very beginning of the recovery, the natural thing to do was to look back at labor conditions, labor market conditions in February of 2010, at the end of the longest expansion in our history. There was so much to like about that labor market, a really historically good labor market—never perfect, but a good labor market. We’re in a different world now. This is a—it’s just very different. The pandemic recession was the deepest, and the recovery has been the fastest. And wages didn’t really go down. And, you know, real incomes were more than fully replaced by fiscal policy [support]. All of this is completely unusual. You know, an economy where inflation was driven by services is now inflation where—all the inflation is in goods, which have had negative inflation for a quarter century. So you ask about full employment. I think we have to—I’m very open to the thought that it’s going to be an empirical question of where it is located, and we’re just going to learn more and more. I mean, one thing we’ll learn, I think, I hope we’ll learn in the next, in the near term is, once the Delta variant really does continue to decline, what’s going to happen to employment? Are we going to start to see over the winter, you know, significant increases in jobs again? If you look back, the three , six , and nine month average job creation is between 550,000 and 600,000. So if you think of that as a stronger—you don’t have to think back to the million job months of June and July. You can just think, okay, 550 to 600—if we should get back on that path, then we would be making good progress, and we like to see that, of course. So we’ll know so much more. And, believe me, we understand. It’s a different world in so many ways. And we’re very open to that. . Thank you.

****FOMCpresconf20211215

. Good afternoon. At the Federal Reserve, we are strongly committed to achieving the monetary policy goals that Congress has given us: maximum employment and price stability. Today, in support of these goals, the Federal Open Market Committee kept interest rates near zero and updated its assessment of the progress that the economy has made toward the criteria specified in the Committee’s forward guidance for interest rates. In addition, in light of the strengthening labor market and elevated inflation pressures, we decided to speed up the reductions in our asset purchases. As I will explain, economic developments and changes in the outlook warrant this evolution of monetary policy, which will continue to provide appropriate support for the economy. Economic activity is on track to expand at a robust pace this year, reflecting progress on vaccinations and the reopening of the economy. Aggregate demand remains very strong, buoyed by fiscal and monetary policy support and the healthy financial positions of households and businesses. The rise in COVID cases in recent weeks, along with the emergence of the Omicron variant, pose[s] risks to the outlook. Notwithstanding the effects of the virus and supply constraints, FOMC participants continue to foresee rapid growth. As shown in our Summary of Economic Projections (SEP), the median projection for real GDP growth stands at 5.5 percent this year and 4 percent next year. Amid improving labor market conditions and very strong demand for workers, the economy has been making rapid progress toward maximum employment. Job gains have been solid in recent months, averaging 378,000 per month over the last three months. The unemployment rate has declined substantially—falling 6/10 of a percentage point since our last meeting and reaching 4.2 percent in November. The recent improvements in labor market conditions have narrowed the differences in employment across groups, especially for workers at the lower end of the wage distribution, as well as for African Americans and Hispanics. Labor force participation showed a welcome rise in November—but remains subdued, in part reflecting the aging of the population and retirements. In addition, some who otherwise would be seeking work report that they are out of the labor force because of factors related to the pandemic, including caregiving needs and ongoing concerns about the virus. At the same time, employers are having difficulties filling job openings, and wages are rising at their fastest pace in many years. How long the labor shortages will persist is unclear, particularly if additional waves of the virus occur. Looking ahead, FOMC participants project the labor market to continue to improve, with the median projection for the unemployment rate declining to 3.5 percent by the end of the year. Compared with the projections made in September, participants have revised their unemployment rate projections noticeably lower for this year and next. Supply and demand imbalances related to the pandemic and [to] the reopening of the economy have continued to contribute to elevated levels of inflation. In particular, bottlenecks and supply constraints are limiting how quickly production can respond to higher demand in the near term. These problems have been larger and longer lasting than anticipated, exacerbated by waves of the virus. As a result, overall inflation is running well above our 2 percent longer run goal and will likely continue to do so well into next year. While the drivers of higher inflation have been predominantly connected to the dislocations caused by the pandemic, price increases have now spread to a broader range of goods and services. Wages have also risen briskly, but, thus far, wage growth has not been a major contributor to the elevated levels of inflation. We are attentive to the risks that persistent real wage growth in excess of productivity [growth] could put upward pressure on inflation. Like most forecasters, we continue to expect inflation to decline to levels closer to our 2 percent longer run goal by the end of next year. The median inflation projection of FOMC participants falls from 5.3 percent this year to 2.6 percent next year  this trajectory is notably higher than projected in September. We understand that high inflation imposes significant hardship, especially on those least able to meet the higher costs of essentials like food, housing, and transportation. We are committed to our price stability goal. We will use our tools both to support the economy and a strong labor market and to prevent higher inflation from becoming entrenched. We will be watching carefully to see whether the economy is evolving in line with expectations. The Fed’s monetary policy actions have been guided by our mandate to promote maximum employment and stable prices for the American people. In support of these goals, the Committee reaffirmed the 0 to ¼ percent target range for the federal funds rate. We also updated our assessment of the progress the economy has made toward the criteria specified in our forward guidance for the federal funds rate. With inflation having exceeded 2 percent for some time, the Committee expects it will be appropriate to maintain this target range until labor market conditions have reached levels consistent with the Committee’s assessments of maximum employment. All FOMC participants forecast that this remaining test will be met next year. The median projection for the appropriate level of the federal funds rate is 0.9 percent at the end of 2022, about ½ percentage point higher than projected in September. Participants expect a gradual pace of policy firming, with the level of the federal funds rate generally near estimates of its longer run level by the end of 2024. Of course, these projections do not represent a Committee decision or plan, and no one knows with any certainty where the economy will be a year or more from now. At today’s meeting, the Committee also decided to double the pace of reductions in its asset purchases. Beginning in mid January, we will reduce the monthly pace of our net asset purchases by $20 billion for Treasury securities and $10 billion for agency mortgage backed securities. If the economy evolves broadly as expected, similar reductions in the pace of net asset purchases will likely be appropriate each month, implying that increases in our securities holdings would cease by mid March—a few months sooner than we anticipated in early November. We are phasing out our purchases more rapidly because, with elevated inflation pressures and a rapidly strengthening labor market, the economy no longer needs increasing amounts of policy support. In addition, a quicker conclusion of our asset purchases will better position policy to address the full range of plausible economic outcomes. We remain prepared to adjust the pace of purchases if warranted by changes in the economic outlook. And, even after our balance sheet stops expanding, our holdings of securities will continue to foster accommodative financial conditions. To conclude: We understand that our actions affect communities, families, and businesses across the country. Everything we do is in service to our public mission. We at the Fed will do everything we can to complete the recovery in employment and achieve our price  stability goal. Thank you. I look forward to your questions. . So maximum employment, if you look at our Statement on Longer  Run Goals and Monetary Policy Strategy, maximum employment is something that we look at a broad range of indicators. And those would include, of course, things like the unemployment rate, the labor force participation rate, job openings, wages, flows in and out of the labor force in various parts of the labor force. We’d also tend to look broadly and inclusively at different demographic groups and not just at the headline and aggregate numbers. So that’s a—that’s a judgment for the Committee to make. The Committee will make a judgment that we’ve achieved labor market conditions consistent with maximum employment when it makes that—it is, admittedly, a judgment call because it’s a range of factors. Unlike inflation, where we have one number that sort of dominates, it’s a broad range of things. So, as I mentioned in my opening remarks, in my view, we are making rapid progress toward maximum employment. And you see that, of course, in some of the factors that I mentioned. . So, on the first part of your question, which is, “Why not stop purchasing now?,” I would just say this: We’ve learned that, in dealing with balance sheet issues, we’ve learned that it’s best to take a careful sort of methodical approach to make adjustments. Markets can be sensitive to it. And we thought that this was—this was a doubling of the speed. We’re basically two meetings away now from finishing the taper. And we thought that was the appropriate way to go. So we announced it, and that’s what will happen. You know, the question of long and variable lags is, is an interesting one. That’s, that’s Milton Friedman’s famous statement. And I do think that in this world, where everything is— where the global financial markets are connected together, financial conditions can change very quickly. And my own sense is that they get into—financial conditions affect the economy fairly rapidly, longer than the traditional thought of, you know, a year or 18 months. Shorter than that, rather. But in addition, when we communicate about what we’re going to do, the markets move immediately [in response] to that. So financial conditions are changing to reflect, you know, the forecasts that we made and basically, which was, I think, fairly in line with what markets were expecting. But financial conditions don’t wait to change until, until things actually happen. They, they change on the expectation of things happening. So I don’t think it’s a question of having to wait. . Yes. The sense of that, of course, being that buying assets is adding accommodation and raising rates is removing accommodation. Since we’re two meetings away from completing the taper, assuming things go as, as expected, I think if we wanted to lift off before then, then, then what we—you would stop the taper potentially sooner. But it’s not something I expect to happen. But I do—I do not think it would be appropriate, and we—and we don’t find ourselves in a situation where we—where we might have to raise rates while we’re still purchasing assets. . So we, we haven’t made any decision of that nature. And so, no, I wouldn’t say that’s our position at all. We really haven’t taken a position on that. I will say that we did talk today–We had our first discussion about the balance sheet, for example. And we went through the way—the sequence of events regarding the runoff and that sort of thing with the balance sheet, last time. And I think people thought that was an interesting discussion. They thought that it was informative, but people pointed out that this is a significantly different economic situation that we have at the current time, and that those—the differences that we see now would tend to influence how we think about the balance sheet. And the same thing would be true about raising rates. I don’t—I don’t foresee that there would be that kind of very extended wait at this time. The economy is so much stronger. I was here at the Fed when we lifted off the last time. And the economy is so much stronger now, so much closer to full employment. Inflation is running well above target, and growth is well above potential. There wouldn’t be the need for that kind of long delay. Having said that, I—you know, we’ll make this decision in coming meetings, and it’s not—it’s not a decision that the Committee has really focused on yet. . Right. So the—you know, the thing is, we’re not going back to the same economy we had in February of 2020. And I think early on, that was—the sense was that that’s where we were headed. The post pandemic labor market, and the economy in general, will be different. And the maximum level of employment that’s consistent with price stability evolves over time within a—within a business cycle and over a longer period, in part reflecting [the] evolution of the factors that affect labor supply, including those related to the pandemic. So I would say: Look, we’re, we’re at 4.2 percent now and it’s been—the unemployment rate has been dropping very quickly. So we’re already in the vicinity of 4 percent. The way in which—The important metric that has been disappointing really has been labor force participation, of course, where we had widely thought—I had certainly thought— that, last fall, as unemployment insurance ran off, as vaccinations increased, [and] as schools reopened, that we would see a significant surge, if you will, or at least a surge, in labor force participation. So we’ve begun to see some improvement. We certainly welcome the 2/10 improvement that we got in the November report. But I do think that it’s—it feels likely now that the return to higher participation is going to take longer. And, in fact, that’s, that’s been the pattern in past cycles—that labor force participation has tended to recover in the wake of a strong recovery in unemployment, which is what we’re getting right now. So you—it could well have been that this cycle was different because of the short nature of it and the very strong—the number of job openings, for example, you would have thought that that would have pulled people back in. But, really, it’s the pandemic, it’s a range of factors. But the reality is, we don’t have a strong labor force participation recovery yet, and we may not have it for some time. At the same time, we have to make policy now. And inflation is well above target. So this is something we need to take into—take into account. . So this is—this is not at all a decision that the Committee has made. But you’re really asking a question about how our framework works. And, yes, there is a— there’s a provision, it used to be called the “balanced approach” provision, that says, in effect, that in situations in which the pursuit of the maximum employment goal and [the pursuit of] the price stability goal are not complementary, we have to take account of the distance from the goal and the—and the speed at which we’re approaching it. And so that is, in effect, an “off ramp” which could, in concept, be taken and it’s in our framework, it’s been in our framework a long time. I’ve talked about it on a number of occasions. It, it is a provision that would enable us to, in this case, because of high inflation, move before achieving maximum employment. Now, we’re—as I said, we’re making rapid progress toward maximum employment in my—in my thinking, in my opinion. And I don’t at all know that we will—that we’ll have to invoke that, that paragraph. But just as a factual matter, that is part of our framework—and has been, really, for a very long time. . Well, I think there’s a lot of uncertainty, which is why we—why we called it out in our statement, our postmeeting statement, as a risk. It’s—we, we follow the same experts and I—we, we talk privately to the same experts that everyone else does and read the same articles in the paper and the same research and, you know, so the—you mentioned the early assessment is highly transmissible, perhaps not as severe, some continuing protection from, from existing vaccines and also existing immunity from having had the disease. That’s a first draft. We’re a long way from knowing what it will turn out to be. It may well come to the United States and replace Delta as the dominant variant fairly quickly. That could easily happen. I think there’s another step there, though—which is what’s going to be the effect on the economy. And that will depend, you know, on how much it suppresses demand as opposed to suppressing supply. It is not clear how big the effects would be on either inflation or growth or hiring on top of what’s already going on, which is quite a strong, you know, wave of Delta that’s hitting large parts of the country across the northern United States and all the way to the eastern seaboard and now coming down. We’re having quite a wave of Delta. So coming in on top of that, again, it’s very difficult to say what the economic effects would be. I do think, wave upon wave, people are learning to live with this. More and more people are getting vaccinated. So [vaccinated] people who get the new variant, it affects them much less than it tends to affect, in the aggregate, people who are not vaccinated. So the more people get vaccinated, the less the economic effect. It doesn’t mean it won’t have an economic effect. Delta had an effect of slowing down hiring. And it actually—it had an effect on global supply chains. And that sort of—that hurt the process of the global supply chains getting worked out. So it can have an economic effect. I just think, at this point, we don’t know much. We’ll know a whole lot more in three weeks, and we’ll know more than that in six weeks. . Yes. Yes, look, I think—if you look at the state of the economy and the amount—the strength of demand, the strength of just overall demand, and the strength of demand for labor, look at inflation, look at wages. I think moving, you know, moving forward the end of our taper by a few months is really—is really an appropriate thing to do. And I think, really, Omicron doesn’t really have much to do with that. . Sure. So I guess I would go back and—you know, it’s been a continual process, really. Inflation really popped up, right? In the late spring last year. And we had a view—it was very, very widely held in the forecasting community—that this would be temporary. It was quite narrow, you know, a limited number of factors were causing it. And there was a decent amount of evidence to support that view, that it would be temporary or transitory, as we said. Certainly, we had five months of declining month on month—monthly readings of inflation, but we didn’t see much in the way of progress on labor supply or on other supply side issues. Then in September, I’d say after Labor Day, we started to see—it started to become clear that this was both larger in its effect on inflation and more persistent. And, of course, I said so on many occasions, and one of the consequences of that is that we move the taper forward. We moved the taper forward and we—and it’s a much faster taper than had been planned. So we’ve been adapting—I’ve been saying we’re adapting our policy. So coming to your real question, we got the ECI reading on the eve of the November meeting—it was the Friday before the November meeting—and it was very high, 5.7 percent reading for the employment compensation index for the third quarter, not annualized, for the third quarter, just before the meeting. And I thought for a second there whether we—whether we should increase our taper, [We] decided to go ahead with what we had—what we had “socialized.” Then, right after that, we got the next Friday after the meeting, two days after the meeting, we got a very strong employment report and, you know, revisions to prior readings and, and no increase in labor supply. And the Friday after that, we got the CPI, which was a very hot, high reading. And I, honestly, at that point, really decided that I thought we needed to—we needed to look at, at speeding up the taper. And we went to work on that. So that’s, that’s really what happened. It was essentially higher inflation and faster—turns out much faster progress in the labor market. Really, what’s happening is the unemployment rate is catching up—seems to be catching up—with a lot of the other readings of a tight labor market, 6/10 [decline] over one cycle. So that’s really what happened and, you know, widely supported in the Committee today, as you can see—unanimous vote—but beyond that I think widely, widely supported, you know, this, this move. . Right. So—but I said—you, you quoted me correctly. It’s, it’s—so far, we don’t see—wages are not a big part of the high inflation story that we’re seeing. As you look forward, let’s assume that the goods economy does sort itself out, and supply chains get working again, and maybe there’s a rebalancing back to services and all that kind of thing. But what, what that leaves behind is the other things that can lead to persistent inflation. In particular—we don’t see this yet, but if you had something where wages were persistently— [increases in] real wages were persistently above productivity growth, that puts upward pressure on, on firms, and they raise prices. It would take something that was persistent and material for that to happen. And we don’t see that yet. But with the kind of hot labor market readings— wages we’re seeing, it’s something that we’re—that we’re watching. And the other thing, of course, is, is rents, which are very important. You know, owners’ equivalent rent. That’s another thing which is very economically sensitive. Unlike the things that are causing the inflation now, this is economically sensitive—and so would be expected to move up. And so as the—as some things go down, the question is: Where will we be when we come out the other side of this? And we need to keep our eyes on those things. . Well, as you know, you know, the SEP is not a plan. It’s not something we debate, negotiate over, or really discuss in terms of what the right answer should be. People write down their, their assumptions—their assessment of appropriate policy based on their economic forecast. And so the median—what you’re talking about, the three rate increases, that’s the median of the Committee—the median of the Committee is also that growth will be 4 percent and then unemployment will be 3½ percent by the end of the year. So that’s a really strong economy. And, of course, if the—if the economy turns out to be quite different from that, then so will the rate. You know, we—no one will say, “Oh, we can’t change our policy because we wrote something down in December.” No one’s ever said that or will. It will—the actual rate decisions we make will depend on our evolving assessment of the forecast. So, for example, if, if the economy were to slow down significantly, then you would expect that that would have an effect of slowing down rate increases. But we’d have to—you know, we look at our two goals, maximum employment and price stability, and we make policy based on them, and not with respect to what we wrote down in a prior SEP. . Okay. So let me start by saying that the inflation that we got was not at all the inflation we were looking for or talking about in the framework. This was—it really was a completely different thing. It was to do with, you know, strong monetary policy and fiscal stimulus into an economy that was recovering rapidly, and in which there were these supply side barriers which effectively led to, you know, in certain parts of the economy, what you might call a vertical supply curve. So, you know, automobile purchases are very interest rate sensitive, and you would think demand would drive up the quantity of cars, But it can’t, because they don’t have semiconductors. So, so that—it was a very different kind of inflation. This is not the inflation we were looking for under our framework at all. It’s nothing to do with our framework. And our—the way we’ve approached it is really nothing to do with our framework. But coming to maximum employment, which is really your question. How do you know? So I think you look at, you know, prices and quantities. When you—if you want to look at maximum employment, you look at prices and quantities, and the main price you look at is wages. It’s one of the things you look at. And, you know, it’s—So I mentioned a number of other things. You can get to 20, if you wanted to, easily, but labor force participation, the unemployment rate, different age groups of—you know, prime age labor force participation, in particular, gets a lot of focus, the JOLTS data get a lot of focus. And wages, that’s, that’s really one of the great signals. The quits rate is another one. The quits rate is really one of the very best indicators, according to a lot of labor economists, because people quit because they feel like they can get a better job. And there’s, you know, record amounts, historically high levels of that going on—suggesting, again, that you’ve got a very tight labor market. So on wages, that’s the price indicator we look at to tell us, along with all the other data, whether we’re—whether we have labor market conditions that are consistent with maximum employment. And so that’s, that’s how we think about it. But the—one of the complications is that, again, we’ve got to make policy in real time. So how do we think about that? Do we—if we think we can make labor, you know, participation might move up—if we, let’s say we knew that it would start to move up in two years, would we wait two years when inflation is running way above target? Probably not, you know, so you have to make an assessment that what’s max—what is the level of maximum employment that is consistent with price stability in real time is, is one way to think about it. . Yes. I mean, I—absolutely. I, I think—well, whether or not we— whether or not we say “we’re at conditions—labor market conditions consistent with, with maximum employment” next year, we would all be open and I think expect, over time, that the level of maximum employment that’s consistent with price stability would increase further over time—for example, through increasing participation. So I—we would certainly—we would not, in any way, want to foreclose the idea that the labor market can get even better. But, again, with inflation as high as it is, we have to make policy in real time. We’ve got to make that assessment in real time. . Well, the labor market is, by so many measures, hotter than it ever ran in the last—in the last expansion, if you think about it. You know, the ratio of job openings, for example, to, to vacancies is at all time highs. Quits, the wages—all those things are, are even hotter. But what would it take for labor force participation to move up more? You know, that’s—really, “Why is it low?” is the question. So there, there are a bunch of answers, and all of them probably have some, you know, some validity. Part of it will be that people—for certain people, they don’t want to go back in the labor force because either they’re medically vulnerable or they’re not comfortable going back while COVID is still everywhere. That’s one thing. The lack of availability of childcare made for caretakers is certainly part of it—not just for children, but for older people. It has been pointed out by many that the stock market is high, people’s portfolios are stronger—they may go back to being a one income rather than a two income family. The same thing with people’s houses. People buy—they have a mortgage, you know, with leverage, and the house price increases, the equity they have in their home might have doubled. And they might make—reach the same conclusion. So they’re—and people have savings on their balance sheet because of forced savings because they couldn’t spend on travel and things like that and also because of, you know, because of government transfers. So, for all of those reasons—and it’s hard to know exactly the part each of them plays— we, we have a situation where we’ve had a shock to labor force participation that is not unwinding as quickly as, as many, as expected. And people—in effect, a good part of it is voluntary. You know, people—and this is how they want to maximize their welfare and that’s, that’s their, certainly their choice. In other cases, it’s something that will abate very quickly if and when the pandemic gets under control. And the longer the pandemic goes on, you know, maybe the less likely that people will come back because they’re—you know, they get used to their new life and they lose contact with their old jobs. That’s, that’s what the evidence would say. So it’s a range of things. It isn’t that the economy lacks stimulus. You know, usually, in every other expansion, it’s that there aren’t enough jobs and people can’t find jobs and, you know, we’re stimulating demand and trying to get demand to come up. That’s not the problem here. The problem is a supply side problem, which—what it would take to work it out, I think it’s going to be time. And the number one thing would, would really be to have the pandemic get under control. That’s what everyone would really like to see: What does the labor force— what does the labor market look like in a world without COVID? That would be the thing that we’d really like to see but, you know, it doesn’t look like that’s coming anytime soon. . Well, there’s a demographic trend underlying all of this. And we actually got above the demographic trend at the end of the last expansion. But—so one would expect over time that labor force participation would, would move down because an aging population, the older people are, the lower their participation rate is. So you would expect that, that the trend would be lower and that, over time, participation would move down. The question of how much we can get back up closer to where we were in February of 2020—and, indeed, for the year or so before that—is a good one. And, I mean, I—What we can do is try to create the conditions. There’s a lot of good for society when you have a tight but stable labor market, where people are coming in, they’re getting into the labor force, they’re getting paid well. In the labor market we had before, we had, you know—the biggest wage increases were going to people at the bottom end of the wage spectrum for the last couple of years. There were just a lot of really desirable aspects of a labor market like that. Higher participation is one of them. And we’d love to get back there. But, again, ultimately, we have the tools that we have, which are essentially to stimulate demand and also to control inflation. I mean, really, it might be—one of the two big threats to getting back to maximum employment is actually high inflation, because, to get back to where we were, the evidence grows that it’s going to take some time. And what we need is another long expansion, like the ones we’ve been having. Over the last 40 years, we’ve had, I think, three of the four longest in our recorded history, including the last one, which was the longest in our recorded history. That’s what it would really take to get back to the kind of labor market we’d like to see. And to have that happen, we need to make sure that we maintain price stability. . We see consumer expense as very strong in this quarter. I don’t know, Edward, whether you’re talking about more shopping online versus shopping in the store, but consumer demand is very strong, incomes are very strong, you know, because people are going back to work and they’re getting wage increases. Admittedly, some of the wage increases is being eaten away by inflation. But, nonetheless, incomes, overall, are going up really significantly because of increased employment and spending is—has been strong. There may be something in the seasonality that this year’s holiday spending may have been pulled forward. And, of course, there may be effects from, from Delta and there might be going forward from Omicron. But fundamentally, though, the consumer is really healthy, and we expect personal consumption expenditures to be pretty strong in the fourth quarter. . So, actually, I’m looking at the SEP here, and the median forecasts for core and headline inflation did move up by 4/10 each. So that’s a significant—you know, in an SEP, that’s a pretty significant move up. You know, it’s, it’s based on both of those things, I suppose. I do think there’s a broad expectation among forecasters, including our own, that the bottlenecks will alleviate sometime over the course of this year. If you look at where Blue Chip forecasts are—which is, you know, a group of well resourced, large forecasting operations with a long track record—they’ll show inflation coming back down significantly toward the back end of next year. I would say, though, as well that our policy should begin to have an effect. There will be a lag, but it should begin to have an effect on that as well. And, you know, that’s the most likely case. I guess what—the thing I would want to say, though, is we can’t act as though that’s a certainty, and we’re not going to act as though that’s a certainty. There’s a real risk now, we believe, I believe, that inflation may be more persistent and that may be putting inflation expectations under pressure, and that the risk of higher inflation becoming entrenched has increased. It’s certainly increased. I don’t think it’s high at this moment, but I think it’s increased. And I think that’s part of the reason behind our move today. [It] is to put ourselves in a position to be able to deal with that risk. And I think we are in a position to deal with that risk. We need to see more data. We need to see how the inflation data and the—all the data evolve in coming months, but we are prepared to, you know, to use our tools to make sure that higher inflation doesn’t get entrenched. For one reason, as I—as I just mentioned, it’s one of the two big threats, the other being the pandemic itself, to getting back to maximum employment. . You know, we have—we have had now for a decade and more a four part financial stability framework that we use so we can—we can hold ourselves to the same kind of framework and, you know, not just treat each event individually. And there are four key areas: asset valuations, debt owed by households and businesses, funding risk, and leverage among financial institutions. So I would say asset valuations—I’m going to go really superficially here, but asset valuations are somewhat elevated, I would say. Debt owed by businesses, you know, and households—households are in very strong financial shape. Businesses actually have a lot of debt, but their default rates are very, very low. But, nonetheless, it’s something we’re watching. Funding risk is, by and large, low among, among financial institutions. But we do see money market funds as a vulnerability and, and, you know, would applaud the SEC’s action this week. Leverage among financial institutions is low, in the sense that [their] capital is high. So, overall, you know, financial stability, that’s how—I wouldn’t make an overall characteristic, but we break it down into those pieces. In terms of the things, you know, that we’re—that we’re looking for, looking at, you know, it’s the—it’s the things we’ve already talked about, to some extent. It’s, it’s the emergence of a new variant that could, you know, that could lead to significant economic—if there were to be a variant, for example, [and if] that were quite resistant to vaccines, it could have another significant effect on the economy. We don’t see that. We don’t have any basis for thinking that the new variant that we have is that one, but it’s certainly one we’re looking at. I would say, you know, cyber risk, the risk of a successful cyberattack, is, for me, you know, always the most—you know, one that would be very difficult to deal with. I think we know how to deal with bad loans and things like that. I think more—a cyberattack that were to take down a major financial institution or financial market utility would be a really significant financial stability risk that we haven’t actually faced yet. So I could go on with a list of “horribles,” but I think that’s a decent picture of where I would start. . You know, I think the concerns there are not so much current financial stability concerns. I, of course, would support the, the views expressed in the President’s Working Group report on stablecoins. Stablecoins can certainly be a useful, efficient, consumer serving, part of the financial system, if they’re properly regulated. And, right now, they aren’t. And, and they have the potential to scale [up], particularly if they were to be, you know, associated with one of the very large tech networks that exist and you could have a payment network that was immediately systemically important—close to immediately systemically important that didn’t have appropriate regulation and protections. The public relies on the government—and [on] the Fed, in particular—to make sure that the payment system is safe and reliable, as well as the dollar and—you know, to provide a safe and reliable trusted currency. So—but I do think those are longer term. In terms of, you know, the more—the cryptocurrencies, you know, that are really speculative assets, I don’t see them as a financial stability concern at the moment. I do think they are risky, they’re not backed by anything, and I think there’s big consumer—issues for consumers who may or may not understand what they’re getting. And there’s certainly developments in the—in the markets that are worth following, which are really not in our jurisdiction, but things like, you know, the kind of leverage that’s built into and those sorts of things is certainly worth, worth watching. . So I would say this. I actually think we are well positioned to deal with, with what’s coming, with the range of plausible outcomes that can come. I do. And I think if you look at how we got here, I do think we’ve, we’ve been adapting to the incoming data, really all the way along, and, you know, noticing and calling out that, that the—both the effects and the persistence of inflation of bottlenecks and labor shortages and things like that. So we’ve been calling out the fact that those were becoming longer, and more persistent, and larger. And now we’re in a position where we’re ending our taper within the next—well, by March, in two meetings, and we’ll be in a position to raise interest rates as and when we think it’s appropriate. And we will, if that—to the extent that’s appropriate. At the same time, we’re going to be seeing a few more months of data. I don’t actually think we’re out of position now. I think this was an important move for us to make. I think that the data that we got toward the end of the fall was a—was a really strong signal that inflation is more persistent and higher—and that the risk of it remaining higher for longer has grown. And I think we’re reacting to that now. And we’ll continue to adapt our policy. So I wouldn’t look at it that we’re “behind the curve.” I would look at it that we’re actually in position now to take the steps that we’ll need to take, you know, in a thoughtful manner to address all of the issues, including that of, of too high inflation. . Are they separate? So our interest rate—I mean, they are separate tools. So the—you know, the, the asset purchases are a separate tool from interest rates. Stopping asset purchases does not remove accommodation. It just stops adding further accommodation. Whereas raising interest rates starts to remove accommodation from what is a highly accommodative stance. You know, the extent to which they’ll be separated in time is, is something we haven’t really discussed at the Committee [meetings] yet. We will be discussing that, obviously, in coming meetings. I don’t think that, that—the last cycle, there was quite a long separation before interest rates. I don’t think that’s at all likely in this cycle. We’re in a very, very different place with high inflation, strong growth, a really strong economy. You know, that—as I mentioned, the SEP medians are for 4 percent growth next year, 3½ percent— 3½ percent unemployment at the end of the year, and the, the—you know, headline inflation of 2.6 percent next year, core at 2.7. So this is a strong economy, one in which it’s appropriate for, for interest rate hikes. So they’re separate, I would say. Your—sorry, your second question was? . Runoff. . So, you know, with the balance sheet, we did have a balance sheet discussion, sort of a prelim—a first, first discussion of balance sheet issues today, [balance] sheet issues, at our meeting this week. We’ll have another at the next meeting and another at the meeting after that I suspect. These are interesting issues to discuss. [We] didn’t make any decisions today. We looked back at what happened in the last cycle, and people thought that was interesting and informative. And—but to one degree or another, people noted that this is just a different situation, and those differences should inform the decisions we make about the balance sheet this time. So [we] haven’t made any decisions at all about, about when runoff would start, but we’re—we’ll be continuing to—you know, in relation to when either liftoff happens or the end of the taper. But those are exactly the decisions we’ll be turning to in coming meetings. . No, I’m not expressing any judgment about, about the stimulus in, in that comment. What I’m saying is, there’s a—there’s a sense among some that “you wanted inflation, this is what you wanted, how do you like it?,” you know? And the truth is, this is not the inflation that we were—what we were talking about in the—in the framework was inflation that comes from a tight labor market, right? So we had 3½ percent unemployment for a period, and we had inflation that was just barely getting to 2 percent. And I—you know, I think, in that setting, our thinking was, we can afford to wait to raise rates until we see actual inflation rather than [acting] preemptive[ly] because, you know, no one had seen what 3½ percent unemployment would look like—with high labor force participation, by the way. No one had seen what it would look—really look like for an extended period, for decades. And we didn’t know what the inflationary implications were. It turned out there was barely 2 percent inflation—and no sense that it was gaining momentum and that kind of thing. So we incorporated that into our framework. This is something completely different. You know, that’s a situation where you had a very, very high level of employment and low inflation. This is literally the opposite. Or, you know, it has been the opposite, where we have very high inflation and we’ve had it since the labor market was in terrible shape. It had nothing—so far, this inflation has really nothing to do with tightness in the labor market. It does have to do with, with strong demand, and strong demand was supported by the Fed, it was supported by Congress. I’m not making any judgments on Congress, it’s not my job. But I will just say, we’re coming out of a, you know, what we certainly hope will be a once in a lifetime, certainly historic—the first really global modern pandemic—which looked at the beginning like it might cause a global depression. And, you know, so we threw a lot of support at it [the economy]. And what’s coming out now is, is, you know, really strong growth, really strong demand, high incomes, and all that kind of thing. You know, people will judge in 25 years whether we—whether we overdid it or not, but, you know, the reality is, we are where we are. And, you know, we think our policy is, is the right one for the situation that we’re in. . So I, I think the short end actions are easy to understand, which is, you know, they’re basically very [monetary] policy sensitive rates at the short end, and it makes sense that it’s reacting to changes in expectations for policy. I think a lot of things go into the, you know, the long rates. And the place I would start is just look at global sovereign yields around the world. Look at JGBs, look at bunds, and they’re so much lower. You can get—you can get, you know, a much higher yield on U.S. Treasuries by buying USTs rather than bunds and you can—you can hedge, hedge the currency risk back into yen, back into euros and still be way ahead. So, in a way, it’s not surprising that there’s a lot of demand for, for U.S. sovereigns in a world—you know, in a risk free world where, where there’s so much—they’re yielding so much more than bunds are, than JGBs. So that’s, that’s a big part of it. I also think, you know, there, there may be some assessment in there of what the neutral rate is or what the terminal rate is. I don’t know about that. But—and I would just say that we, you know, we write down our own estimates of the—of the terminal rate or the neutral rate of interest. Those are highly uncertain. And, you know, we’ll make policy based on what we’re seeing in the economy rather than based on what a neutral—what a model might say the neutral rate is. We, we all had the experience of the last cycle, where we all, through that cycle, were trying to estimate what the neutral rate was, and it turned out—you know, I think we learned a lot from seeing what happens. We ended up cutting rates three times after raising them to 2¼ to 2½ percent. So I’m not troubled by where the long bond [rate] is. You know, I see that it’s low. You know, I mean, we’re really focused on broader financial conditions, [and] we’re focused on maximum employment and price stability. . Sure, I’d be happy to talk about that. So, as I mentioned, we got the ECI reading just before the November meeting. We got the labor market report two days after the meeting. And then, one week after that, I think on the 12th of November, we got the CPI reading. It was really the CPI reading, in concert with those two, and I, I just came to the view over that weekend that we needed to speed up the taper. And we started working on that. That's a full 10 days or so before the President made a decision of renominating me. So, honestly, it had—it had nothing to do with that at all. And I just thought this is what we got to do. My colleagues were out talking about the—a faster taper. And that doesn’t happen by accident. They were out talking about a faster taper before the President made his decision. So it’s a decision that effectively was in—more than in train and, you know, to the point where people were talking about it publicly. So that’s what happened. And it had absolutely nothing to do with it whatsoever. We’re always going to just do what we think is the right thing, and I certainly will always just do what I think the right thing is for the economy and for the people that we serve. . I didn’t push back at all. And the reason I didn’t—and there was no—there was lots of talk about that, but not from the Fed, because that is not our job. We are not the CBO, and we’re not elected by anybody. So we take fiscal policy as it arrives at our front door, and we don’t comment—you know, we make our own assessments inside the Fed, but it’s really not our role. And I think, very important, that we stay out of that business, no matter who’s in the White House, who’s in Congress. It’s just—it’s just not our job and it’s something we avoid pretty, pretty assiduously. . Thank you.

****FOMCpresconf20220126

. Good afternoon. At the Federal Reserve, we are strongly committed to achieving the monetary policy goals that Congress has given us: maximum employment and price stability. Today, in support of these goals, the Federal Open Market Committee kept its policy interest rate near zero and stated its expectation that an increase in this rate would soon be appropriate. The Committee also agreed to continue reducing its net asset purchases on the schedule we announced in December—bringing them to an end in early March. As I will explain, against a backdrop of elevated inflation and a strong labor market, our policy has been adapting to the evolving economic environment, and it will continue to do so. Economic activity expanded at a robust pace last year, reflecting progress on vaccinations and the reopening of the economy, fiscal and monetary policy support, and the healthy financial positions of households and businesses. Indeed, the economy has shown great strength and resilience in the face of the ongoing pandemic. The recent sharp rise in COVID cases associated with the Omicron variant will surely weigh on economic growth this quarter. High frequency indicators point to reduced spending in COVID sensitive sectors, such as travel and restaurants. And activity more broadly may also be affected as many workers are unable to report for work because of illness, quarantines, or caregiving needs. Fortunately, health experts are finding that the Omicron variant has not been as virulent as previous strains of the virus, and they expect that cases will drop off rapidly. If the wave passes quickly, the economic effects should as well, and we would see a return to strong growth. That said, the implications for the economy remain uncertain. And we have not lost sight of the fact that for many afflicted individuals and families, and for the health care workers on the front lines, the virus continues to cause great hardship. The labor market has made remarkable progress and, by many measures, is very strong. Job gains have been solid in recent months, averaging 365,000 per month over the past three months. Over the past year, payroll employment has risen by 6.4 million jobs. The unemployment rate has declined sharply, falling 2 percentage points over the past six months to reach 3.9 percent in December. The improvements in labor market conditions have been widespread, including for workers at the lower end of the wage distribution, as well as for African Americans and Hispanics. Labor demand remains historically strong. With constraints on labor supply, employers are having difficulties filling job openings, and wages are rising at their fastest pace in many years. While labor force participation has edged up, it remains subdued, in part reflecting the aging of the population and retirements. In addition, some who would otherwise would be seeking work report that they are out of the labor force because of factors related to the pandemic, including caregiving needs and ongoing concerns about the virus. The current wave of the virus may well prolong these effects. Over time, there are good reasons to expect some further improvements in participation and employment. Inflation remains well above our longer run goal of 2 percent. Supply and demand imbalances related to the pandemic and [to] the reopening of the economy have continued to contribute to elevated levels of inflation. In particular, bottlenecks and supply constraints are limiting how quickly production can respond to higher demand in the near term. These problems have been larger and longer lasting than anticipated, exacerbated by waves of the virus. While the drivers of higher inflation have been predominantly connected to the dislocations caused by the pandemic, price increases have now spread to a broader range of goods and services. Wages have also risen briskly, and we are attentive to the risks that persistent real wage growth in excess of productivity [growth] could put upward pressure on inflation. Like most forecasters, we continue to expect inflation to decline over the course of the year. We understand that high inflation imposes significant hardship, especially on those least able to meet the higher costs of essentials like food, housing, and transportation. In addition, we believe that the best thing we can do to support continued labor market gains is to promote a long expansion, and that will require price stability. We are committed to our price stability goal. We will use our tools both to support the economy and a strong labor market and to prevent higher inflation from becoming entrenched. And we’ll be watching carefully to see whether the economy is evolving in line with expectations. The Fed’s monetary policy actions have been guided by our mandate to promote maximum employment and stable prices for the American people. As I noted, the Committee left the target range for the federal funds rate unchanged and reaffirmed our plan, announced in December, to end asset purchases in early March. In light of the remarkable progress we’ve seen in the labor market and inflation that is well above our 2 percent longer run goal, the economy no longer needs sustained high levels of monetary policy support. That is why we are phasing out our asset purchases and why we expect it will soon be appropriate to raise the target range for the federal funds rate. Of course, the economic outlook remains highly uncertain. Making appropriate monetary policy in this environment requires humility, recognizing that the economy evolves in unexpected ways. We’ll need to be nimble so that we can respond to the full range of plausible outcomes. With this in mind, we will remain attentive to risks, including the risk that high inflation is more persistent than expected, and are prepared to respond as appropriate to achieve our goals. To provide greater clarity about our approach for reducing the size of the Federal Reserve’s balance sheet, today the Committee issued a set of principles that will provide a foundation for our future decisions. [In] these high level principles, [we] clarify that the federal funds rate is our primary means of adjusting monetary policy and that reducing our balance sheet will occur after the process of raising interest rates has begun. Reductions will occur over time in a predictable manner primarily through adjustments to reinvestments so that securities roll off our balance sheet. Over time, we intend to hold securities in the amounts needed for our ample  reserves operating framework, and in the longer run, we envision holding primarily Treasury securities. Our decisions to reduce our balance sheet will be guided by our maximum employment and price stability goals. In that regard, we will be prepared to adjust any of the details of our approach to balance sheet management in light of economic and financial developments. The Committee has not made decisions regarding the specific timing, pace, or other details of shrinking the balance sheet. And we will discuss these matters in upcoming meetings and provide additional information at the appropriate time. To conclude: We understand that our actions affect communities, families, and businesses across the country. Everything we do is in service to our public mission. We at the Federal Reserve will do everything we can to achieve our maximum employment and price  stability goals. Thank you. I look forward to your questions. . Thanks. So, as I—as I referred to in my opening statement, it’s—it is not possible to predict with much confidence exactly what path for our policy rate is going to prove appropriate. And so, at this time, we haven’t made any decisions about the path of policy. And I stress again that we’ll be humble and nimble. We’re going to have to navigate crosscurrents and actually two sided risks now. So—and, and I’ll say also that we’re going to be guided by the data. In fact, what I’ll say is that we’re going to be led by the incoming data and the evolving outlook, which we’ll try to communicate as clearly as possible, moving steadily and transparency—transparently. So more to your question, we know that the economy is in a very different place than it was when we began raising rates in 2015. Specifically, the economy is now much stronger. The labor market is far stronger. Inflation is running well above our 2 percent target, much higher than it was at that time. And these differences are likely to have important implications for the appropriate pace of policy adjustments. Beyond that, we haven’t made any decisions. . Sorry. Just getting both, both parts of your question written down. So I would say—and this view is widely held on the Committee—that both sides of the mandate are calling for us to move steadily away from the very highly accommodative policies we put in place during the challenging economic conditions that the economy faced earlier in the pandemic. And I would say that most FOMC participants agree that labor market conditions are consistent with maximum employment in the sense of the highest level of employment that is consistent with price stability. And that is—that is my personal view. And, and, again, very broad support on the Committee for the judgment that it will soon be appropriate to raise the target range for the federal funds rate. The other thing is, maximum employment will, will evolve over time and through the course of the business cycle. In the particular situation we’re in now, it may well increase. Max—the level of maximum—of employment that’s consistent with stable prices may increase. And we hope that it will, as more people come back into the labor market, as participation gradually rises. And the policy path that we’re broadly contemplating would be supportive of that comment—that outcome as well. So the thing about the labor market right now is that there are—there are many millions of, of more job openings than there are unemployed people. So you ask whether we can— whether we can raise rates and, and move to less accommodative, and even tight, financial conditions without hurting the labor market. I think there’s quite a bit of room to raise interest rates without threatening the labor market. This is, by so many measures, a historically tight labor market. Record levels of job openings, of quits. Wages are moving up at the highest pace they have in decades. If you look at surveys of workers, they find jobs plentiful. Look at surveys of companies—they find workers scarce. And all of those readings are at levels, really, that we haven’t seen in a long time—and, in some cases, ever. So this is a very, very strong labor market, and my strong sense is that we can—we can—we can move rates up without, without having to, you know, severely undermine it. I also would point out that there are—there are other forces at work this year, which should also help bring down inflation, we hope, including improvement on the supply side, which will ultimately come. The timing and pace of that are uncertain. And also, fiscal policy is going to be less supportive of, of growth this year—not of the level of economic activity, but the fiscal impulse to growth will be significantly lower. So there are multiple forces—which should be working over the course of the year for inflation to come down. We do realize that the timing and pace of that are, are highly uncertain and that inflation has persisted longer than we—than we thought. And, of course, we’re prepared to use our tools to assure that higher inflation does not become entrenched. . So I’m afraid to tell you that those are all great questions, and they’re questions that the Committee is just turning to now. So we had—we had a discussion, as you know, at the last meeting, an introductory discussion of the balance sheet and a teeing up of the issues. At this meeting, we’ve gone through and carefully put together a set of principles at a high level. And those are meant to guide the actual decisions we’ll make about the pace and about all of the questions that you’re, you’re asking. And I expect that this process will, will be something that we spend time on in coming meetings. I can’t tell you how many. I can’t tell you how long it will take. But—and then, you know, at the appropriate time, we’ll provide additional information. So I did—the last cycle when we—when we went through balance sheet issues, we did find that over, over the course of two or three meetings, for example, we did come to interesting and better answers, we thought. So we’re just in that process now. And at the next meeting, we’ll be turning to, you know, more of the details that you’re—that you’re asking about. I would say this. The balance sheet is, is much bigger. I’d say it has a shorter duration than the last time. And the economy’s much stronger, and inflation is much higher. So—and I think that leads you to—and I said, I’ve said this—being willing to move sooner than we did the last time and also perhaps faster. But beyond that, it’s really—it’s really not appropriate for me to speculate exactly what that would be. And, and—but I would point you to principle number one, which is “the Committee views changes in the target range for the federal funds rate as its primary means of adjusting the stance of monetary policy.” So we do want the federal funds rate—we, we want to operationalize that [as the primary means]. And we want the balance sheet to be declining in a predictable manner, and we want it to be declining primarily by adjusting reinvestments. . So, again, we think of the balance sheet as, as moving in a predictable manner, sort of in the background, and that the active tool meeting to meeting is not both of them, it’s the federal funds rate. There are—there are rules of thumb—I’m reluctant to land on one of them—that, that equate this. And—but there’s also an element of, of uncertainty around the balance sheet. I think we have a much better sense, frankly, of how rate increases affect financial conditions and, hence, economic conditions. Balance sheet [policy] is, is still a relatively new thing for, for the markets and for us, so we’re less certain about that. So, again, our—I think our—the pattern we’ll follow is to—is to arrive at a, you know, a timing and a pace and composition and all those things and then announce that with advance notice, and, and it will—it will start in the background. And then we’ll look to have that just running in the background and have—and have the interest rates, again, be the active tool of monetary policy. That’s, that’s at least the plan. I can’t tell you much more about any of the— any of the very good issues about size, pace, composition, those sorts of things. But we’ll be turning to all of those at coming meetings. . So, as you know, the ultimate focus that we have is on the real economy: maximum employment and price stability. And financial conditions matter to the extent that they have implications for achieving the dual mandate. And you also know that we, we look at broader financial conditions, not one or two things, one or two markets. And what we’re always asking ourselves is, are we seeing changes that are both persistent and material enough that—of a change in financial conditions—that they are inconsistent with the achievement of our goals? So that’s how we’re looking at that. And I don’t want to comment on today’s financial conditions broadly, but we’re not looking at any one market or, or so. So that’s how we’re thinking. In terms of what we’ve seen, I would say this. We, you know, we said at our last meeting we published the Summary of Economic Projections, the median of which—the median participant expected three rate increases this year. And, you know, it’s six weeks, seven weeks later now. And you have seen that our communication channel with the markets is working. Markets are, are now pricing in a number of rate increases. Surveys show that market participants are expecting a balance sheet runoff to begin, you know, at the appropriate time, sometime later this year perhaps. We haven’t made that decision yet. So we, we feel like the communications we have with market participants and with the general public are working and that financial conditions are reflecting in advance the decisions that we make. And monetary policy works significantly through expectations. So that, that in and of itself is appropriate. . Well, you’re right. We haven’t got—we haven’t gotten to that point yet. We haven’t made a decision yet, and we’ll make that decision at the March meeting. We’ll make a decision whether to raise the federal funds rate. I would say that the Committee is, is of a mind to, to raise the federal funds rate at the March meeting, assuming that conditions are appropriate for doing so. We have—we have our eyes on, on the risks, particularly around the world. But we do expect some softening in the economy from Omicron, but we think that that should be temporary. And we think that the economy should—the underlying strength of the economy should, you know, should, should—show through fairly quickly after that. . I think the path is highly uncertain and that we’re committed to using our tools to make sure that inflation, high inflation that we’re seeing, does not become entrenched. So a number of factors would be—it’s not just monetary policy—a number of factors are supporting a decline in inflation, as I mentioned. Fiscal policy will be—will provide significantly less of an impulse to growth. We do expect this year—although we do expect now that it will come slower than, than we had expected and hoped—that there will be relief on the supply side. So that, too, should—should lower the supply side barriers, which are a big part of the story of why inflation is high. In addition, monetary policy will be becoming significantly less accommodative. So the question is—you know, we’ll, we’ll be asking this question all year long, and that will be, are things turning out as we expect? There’s a case that, for whatever reason, the economy slows more and inflation slows more than expected  we’ll react to that. If, instead, we see inflation at a higher level or a more persistent level, then we’ll react to that. And, again, we’re, we’re well aware that this is a different economy than—than existed during the last tightening cycle, and our policy is going to reflect those differences. . So let me—let me—let me start by talking about that last paragraph. So you’ll remember during the last cycle that this process of building up and then shrinking the balance sheet is a complicated one, and it involves, inevitably, surprises. And so during, during the years, during the prior cycle, we amended our balance sheet principles a number of times. Now, we didn’t intend to do that. It just—events required us to do so. So we got a pretty robust paragraph there that says we’re free to do this at any time. And it doesn’t mean we’re going to, but if the situation turns out to be different than we had thought, we’re not going to be—we’re not going to stick with something that isn’t working. That’s all that’s saying. It’s meant to be quite a general statement rather than a, a hint. So, I mean, I like to think that our, you know, our philosophy of the balance sheet is, is embodied in these principles. So, you know, the idea that, for example, the federal funds rate is the primary means of adjusting the stance of policy, that we’ll use—determine the timing and pace of reducing the size of the balance sheet to foster the dual mandate, that we’ll begin to reduce the size after we begin the process of raising rates, and on and on like that. I mean, that— those are all the things that, that try to describe how we will proceed. But maybe at a higher level, to try to get at your question: You know, asset purchases were, were enormously important at the beginning of the recovery in terms of restoring market function, as they were at—right after the—in the critical phase of the Global Financial Crisis. And then after [that], they were a macroeconomic tool to support demand. And now the economy no longer needs this, this highly accommodative policy that we put in place. So it’s time to stop asset purchases first and then, at the appropriate time, start to shrink the balance sheet. Now, the balance sheet is, is substantially larger than it needs to be. We’ve identified the end state as—in amounts needed to implement monetary policy efficiently [and] effectively in the ample reserves regime. So there’s a substantial amount of, of shrinkage in the balance sheet to be done. That’s going to take some time. We want that process to be orderly and predictable. And so those are some of the ways that I would think this, this lays out our, you know, the way we—the way we’re thinking about this. In terms of the timing, I can’t really help you. You know, it just says after, after we get under way. So we’re—I would say we are, we’re going to have another discussion at, at the next meeting. And my guess is, we’ll have at least one other discussion at the meeting after that. And, you know, we’ll, we’ll tell you as we make progress. And we’ll, you know, we’ll start the process of allowing runoff and shrinking the balance sheet at what we find to be the appropriate time. It’s—I wish I could say more. But, honestly, we haven’t made those decisions. And we actually haven’t even really had the, the important discussions on a lot of the details that we will have at coming meetings. . So you asked about the risks first. So I—you know, the one risk is that inflation risks are still to the upside in the views of most FOMC participants and, certainly, in my view as well. There’s a risk that, that the high inflation we’re seeing will be prolonged, and there’s a risk that it will move even higher. So we don’t—we don’t think that’s the base case, but you asked what the risks are. And that’s—we have to be in a position with our monetary policy to address all of the plausible outcomes. And that calls for us to be in position. We, we have an expectation about the way the economy is going to be evolved, but we’ve got to be in a position to, to address different outcomes, including the one where inflation remains higher. And, of course, that is a risk to the—to the—to the expansion. You know, we’ve been saying that what we need here is another long expansion, which is the kind of thing we saw over the last [one], which was a record long expansion. We saw labor force participation rise. We saw wages persistently higher for people at the lower end, and there, there really was no obvious imbalance in the economy that threatened that expansion. It could have gone on for years were it not hit by the pandemic. So we’d love to find a way to get back to that. That’s going to require price stability, and that’s going to require the Fed to tighten interest rate policy and do our part in getting inflation back down to our 2 percent goal. So I mentioned two sided risks. You know, a couple things. One, Omi—COVID is not over. And COVID can continue to evolve, and it’s just—we have to accept that it’s not over, and the risks to it can slow down growth. And that would be—that’s sort of a downside risk from a growth standpoint. I would point to—you know, another, another risk is just further, further problems in the supply chains, which could slow down activity. And you see the situation in China as a situation there where that’s—their no COVID policy may cause more lockdowns, is likely to, and that may play into—may play into more problems in supply chains. In addition, there’s what’s going on in Eastern Europe and things like that. So there’s plenty of risk out there. And we, you know, we can’t—we can’t forget that there are risks on both sides. So that’s, that’s there. That’s what I would say. I know you’ve been all over this issue with, with my colleagues, Craig, on the issue of, of information. We don’t—we don’t have that information at the Board. And, you know, I hand— I asked the inspector general to do an investigation, and that is out of my hands. I play no role in it. I seek to play no role in it. And I don’t—I really—I can’t help you here today on this issue. And I’m sorry I can’t. . So I’d say, you know, since, since the December meeting, I would say that the inflation situation is about the same but probably slightly worse. I’d be inclined to raise my own estimate of 2022 core PCE inflation—let’s just go with that—by a few tenths today. But we’re not writing, writing down an SEP at this meeting. But I think it’s—it hasn’t gotten better. It’s probably gotten just a—just a bit worse, and that’s been the pattern. That’s been the pattern. So I think if you look at the—the FOMC participants are—there’s a range there. And that range has been moving to the right for, for a year now. And, by the way, if you look at other forecasters, essentially all other macro forecasters who do this for a living, you’ve seen the same pattern. So, what do we think about that? Well, I think we, you know, we wrote down rate increases in the December meetings, each of us individually. And I think to the extent the situation deteriorates further, our policy will have to address that, if it deteriorates meaningfully further, either in the time dimension or in the size of the inflation dimension. So that’s how we’re thinking about it. I—as I mentioned, though, I think it’s—part of this will be that us, the Fed, moving away from a very highly accommodative policy to a substantially less accommodative policy and then, over time, to a policy that’s not accommodative, in time. I don’t know when that will be. That’s—those are the things that we’re—that we’re thinking about. That’s, that’s part of it. Another part of it is that fiscal policy provided an impulse to growth over the last two years. That impulse will be less, in fact, will be—will be negative this year. And so that’s another thing. The other one is, we will eventually get relief on the supply side. And, you know, the ports will be cleared up. And there will be semiconductors and things like that. Now, what we’re learning is, it’s just taking much longer, so I think—longer than expected. And that, I think, does raise, raise the risk that high inflation will be more persistent. I do think we’ll come off of the highs that we saw in the early part of this episode in the—in the spring last year. But, really, what’s—the question is going to be, what is inflation running at? And so we’ll be watching that. And I, you know, we—our objective is to get inflation back down to 2 percent. It’s also to provide enough support to keep the labor market healthy. The labor market is very, very strong right now, and I think that that strength will continue. There’s a—there’s really a shortage of workers. We see it particularly among production and nonsupervisory workers and people in the lowest quartile. You see very large wage increases. I mentioned some of the other indicators. So I think that’s, that’s what we’re looking at. And we’re also—you know, we realize, I think, as everyone does, that this outlook is quite uncertain and that we’re going to have to adapt. And we’re going to communicate as clearly as we can. But we’re going to have to be adaptable and, you know, move, move as appropriate. . So, as I mentioned, we have not made these decisions. We really haven’t. And, and what I can tell you now, though, is that we fully appreciate that this is a different situation. If you look back to where we were in 2015, ’16, ’17, ’18 when we were raising rates, inflation was very close to 2 percent, even below 2 percent. Unemployment was, was not at our estimates of the natural rate. And growth was, you know, in the 2 to 3 percent range. Right now, we have inflation running substantially above 2 percent and, and, you know, more persistently than we would like. We have growth—even in forecasts, even in the somewhat reduced forecast for 2022—we still see growth higher than, substantially higher than what we estimate to be the potential growth rate. And we see a labor market where, by so many measures, it is historically tight. I think the—you know, in a way, the least tight aspect of it is, is looking at the unemployment rate, which is still below our median estimate of, of [the unemployment rate consistent with] maximum employment. If you look at things like quits and job openings, as I mentioned earlier, and wages, you’re seeing—and, and just the ratio of job openings to unemployed—you’re seeing a very, very tight labor market. Now, we also know that labor force participation is significantly lower. It’s 1½ percentage points lower than it was in February of 2020. Maybe a [full] percentage point of that is, is retirements. Some part of those retirements are, are, you know, related to COVID rather than just regular retirements. So we think there’s, there’s a pool of people out there who could come back into the labor force. But it’s not happening very quickly, and it may not—it may continue to not happen very quickly as long as the pandemic is on[going]. So that’s, that’s, that’s how we think about that. We haven’t made—to your specific question—we really have not addressed those questions. And we’ll begin to address them as we—as we move into the March meeting and meetings after that. . So it’s, it’s more a matter of—I think the problem that we’re—that we’re talking about here is really that people who are on fixed incomes who are living paycheck to paycheck, they’re spending most or all of their—of, of what they’re earning on food, gasoline, rent, heating their—heating, things like that, basic necessities. And so inflation right away, right away forces people like that to make very difficult decisions. So that’s really the point. I don’t—I’m not aware of, you know, inflation literally falling more on, on different socioeconomic groups. It’s—that’s not the point. The point is, some people are just really in a—prone to suffer more. I mean, for people who are economically well off, inflation isn’t good. It’s bad. High inflation is, is bad, but they’re going to be able to continue to eat and keep their homes and drive their cars and things like that. It’s more—so that, that’s really how I think of it. And, you know, we, we have to control inflation for the benefit of all Americans. But part of—part of it is just that it’s particularly hard on people with fixed incomes and low incomes who spent most of their—of their income on necessities, which are—which are experiencing high inflation now. . So I, I would not say that I would expect the supply chain issues to be completely worked out by the end of this year. I do not expect them, and I have not expected them. What I would say, and I have been saying, is that I expect progress to be made in the second half of this year, mainly—progress because we’re not making much progress. If you look at a ton of metrics, you can find some that suggest that delivery times are shorter and inventories in some industries moving up. But, overall, we’re not—we’re not making progress. And, you know, things like the semiconductor issue are going to—they’re going to be quite a long time. I would think they’ll go more than through 2023. In terms of—so in terms of being too late, I would just say this. We—our policy needs to be positioned to address the full range of plausible outcomes, as I said, and particularly the possibility that inflation will continue to run higher, more persistently than we’d expected. And we think we are positioned to make the changes in our policy to do that, and, and we’re committed to doing that. And that’s, that’s really where we are. In terms of your, your question about the, the size of rate increases, we haven’t—we haven’t faced those decisions. We haven’t made them. It isn’t possible to sit down here today and tell you with any confidence what the—what the precise path will be. But in—as we work our way through this, meeting by meeting, we are aware that this is a very different, different expansion, as I’ve said a couple times, with higher inflation, higher growth, a much stronger economy. And I think those differences are likely to be reflected in—in the policy that we implement. . So, no. There’s no—there’s nothing in our framework about having inflation run below 2 percent so that we would do that, try to achieve that outcome. So the answer to that is, is “no.” What we’re trying to do is get inflation, keep inflation expectations well anchored at 2 percent. That’s, that’s always the, the ultimate goal. And we do that in the service of having inflation—we get to that goal by having inflation average 2 percent over time. And if inflation doesn’t average 2 percent over time, then it’s not clear why inflation expectations would be anchored at 2 percent. So that, that’s the way we think about that. You know, it—what was the last part of your—of your question? . Nothing like that. I mean, I would say you have a tremendously strong labor market. And you have growth this year at—forecast to be well above—well above potential. I mean, people who are forecasting growth think potential growth is around 2 [percent]. Most forecasts [of actual growth] are significantly above that for 2022, and that’s even with, with policy becoming substantially less accommodative. So the labor market’s going to be strong for some time. We’re—ideally, what we’re trying to achieve is inflation getting back down to 2 percent. And we’re trying to do that in a process that, that, that accomplishes—you know, that will also leave the labor market in a very strong position. And no one really knows what that will take. Again, I would say that it isn’t just monetary policy that’s helping inflation get down. It’ll be supply side improvements, and it’ll be less, less fiscal, you know, less fiscal impulse in all likelihood. So—but monetary policy will do our job. It is our job to get inflation down to 2 percent. And a situation where, where the two goals are—the two goals can be in tension is a difficult one. But I—but I don’t really think they are here, though, because I think a really significant threat to further strengthening in the labor market in the form of higher participation over time is high inflation. And also, high inflation is taking away the benefits of some of these larger wage increases that we’re seeing now. So we do hope to achieve, and our plan is to achieve, both of those goals. . State dependency was particularly around the thought that if we—if we saw a very strong labor market, we would wait to see actual inflation—actual inflation before we tightened. And so that was a very state dependent thought because, for a long time, we’d been tightening on the expectation of high inflation, which never appeared. And that was the case for, for a number of years. So in this particular situation, we will be clearly monitoring incoming data as well as the evolving outlook. . So I think it’s too soon to write that history, really. But what I would say is this. The—if you remember what it felt like at the beginning of the pandemic, literally the global economy shutting down in large part, including our own economy, and people going to their homes for weeks on end in masks, and there are no vaccines, and it could be a really long time to get them, you know. And then, you know, you have—economic activity drops by a shocking amount in one—so there was a real risk of lasting damage. And I think Congress responded remarkably with the—with the CARES Act, incredibly timely and very powerful. People will—there’ll always be flaws in these things. But in real time, it was a remarkable achievement. And we responded. And what we were able to do was, you know, stave off a collapse of the financial system at the beginning and make time for what really needed to happen, which was the income replacement and then the recovery that Congress enabled with the CARES Act. So now, that was a lot of—that was a lot. And what we did was a lot. And, you know, now—so, what we have now is, we have the strongest recovery of any, any country. And we have—we have a recovery that looks completely unlike other recoveries that we’ve had, because we’ve, we’ve put so much support behind the recovery. And we’re managing the, the relatively high class problems that come with that, which are high inflation and a labor shortage. So—and these are serious problems, very serious problems that we, you know, we’re working as hard as we can on. Was it too much? Again, I’m going to leave that to the historians. And—but look, in 25 years, we’ll look back at this incident, which will be a, you know, 2 , 3 , 4 , 5 year period. And we’ll say, you know, we’ll have a—we’ll have a much better basis to make a judgment about the actions that people took. But it was all founded, though, in a—in a very strong reaction to a, you know, to a unique historical event. And I guess I’ll have to leave it at that. I look for—I hope I’ll be around to see how that looks in 25 years. . So we, we do monitor the slope of the yield curve, but we don’t control the slope of the yield curve. Many flat—many factors influence longer term interest rates. But it is something that we watch, and, and you will know that from when we had this issue a few years ago. And we take it into account, along with many other financial conditions, as we try to assess the implications of all those conditions for the economic outlook. So that’s, that’s one thing I would say. Another is, currently, you’ve got a slope. If you think about 2s to 10s, 2 year Treasury to 10 year Treasury, I think that’s around 75 basis points. That’s well within the range of a normal—of a normal yield curve slope. So it’s something we’re monitoring. We don’t think of it as—I don’t think of it as some kind of an iron law. But we do look at it and try to understand the implications and what it’s telling us. And it’s—but it’s one of many things that we monitor. . We’d—that’s, that’s a good question in, in real time. Obviously, U.S. long term sovereign debt is an—is an important global asset. And it—and the fact that our rates are so much higher than, than other risk free sovereign rates around the world may put something of a ceiling on our—on our rates. I don’t know. But it would really depend on the— on the facts and circumstances at that time. . I would describe what we’re doing along these lines. This is going to be a year in which we move steadily away from the very highly accommodative monetary policy that we put in place to deal with the—with the economic effects of the pandemic. And that’s going to involve a number of things. It’s going to involve and does involve finishing asset purchases. It’s going to involve lifting off. And it’s going to involve additional rate increases as appropriate. And we, we have—we’re going to write down in March our next assessment of what that might be. It’s going to continue to evolve as the data evolve. We need to be quite adaptable, I think, in our understanding of this. The last thing we’re going to do is, we’re going to have a couple more meetings, I think, to talk about allowing the balance sheet to begin to run off and [to] do so in a predictable manner. And that’s, that’s something that we will also be doing as appropriate. And I wouldn’t—I don’t think it’s possible to say exactly how this is going to go. And we’re, we’re going to need to be, as I’ve mentioned, nimble about this. And the economy is quite different this time. I’ve said this several times now. The economy is quite different. It’s stronger. Inflation is higher. The labor market is much, much stronger than it was. And growth is above trend, even this year, let alone last year. So all of those things are going to go into our thinking as we make—as we make monetary policy. And you asked about financial stability concerns. In connection with our policy–was that your question? . I would just say this. We, we, of course, have a financial stability framework. And what it shows is a number of, of positive aspects of financial stability. But you mentioned, really, [the behavior of] asset prices is one of the four. So asset prices are somewhat elevated, and they reflect a high risk appetite and that sort of thing. I don’t really think asset prices themselves represent a significant threat to financial stability, and that’s because households are in good shape financially than they have been. Businesses are in good shape financially. Defaults on business loans are low and that kind of thing. The banks are highly capitalized with high liquidity and quite resilient and strong. There are some concerns in the—in the nonbank financial sector around—still around money market funds, although the SEC is making—has made some very positive proposals there. And we also saw some things in the Treasury market during the acute phase of the crisis, which, which we’re looking at ways to address. But, overall, the financial stability vulnerabilities are manageable—are manageable, I would say.

****FOMCpresconf20220316

. Good afternoon. I want to begin by acknowledging the tremendous hardship the Ukrainian people are suffering as a result of Russia’s invasion. The human toll is tragic. The financial and economic implications for the global economy and the U.S. economy are highly uncertain. At the Federal Reserve, we are strongly committed to achieving the monetary policy goals that Congress has given us: maximum employment and price stability. Today, in support of these goals, the FOMC raised its policy interest rate by ¼ percentage point. The economy is very strong, and against the backdrop of an extremely tight labor market and high inflation, the Committee anticipates that ongoing increases in the target range for the federal funds rate will be appropriate. In addition, we expect to begin reducing the size of our balance sheet at a coming meeting. Economic activity expanded at a robust 5½ percent pace last year, reflecting progress on vaccinations and the reopening of the economy, fiscal and monetary policy support, and the healthy financial positions of households and businesses. The rapid spread of the Omicron variant led to some slowing in economic activity early this year. But cases have declined sharply since mid January, and the slowdown seems to have been mild and brief. Although the invasion of Ukraine and related events represent a downside risk to the outlook for economic activity, FOMC participants continue to foresee solid growth. As shown in our Summary of Economic Projections, the median projection for real GDP growth stands at 2.8 percent this year, 2.2 percent next year, and 2 percent in 2024. The labor market has continued to strengthen and is extremely tight. Over the first two months of the year, employment rose by more than a million jobs. In February, the unemployment rate hit a post pandemic low of 3.8 percent, a bit below the median of Committee participants’ estimates of its longer run normal level. The improvements in labor market conditions have been widespread, including for workers at the lower end of the wage distribution as well as for African Americans and Hispanics. Labor demand is very strong, and while labor force participation has increased somewhat, labor supply remains subdued. As a result, employers are having difficulties filling job openings, and wages are rising at their fastest pace in many years. FOMC participants expect the labor market to remain strong, with the median projection for the unemployment rate declining to 3.5 percent by the end of this year and remaining near that level thereafter. Inflation remains well above our longer run goal of 2 percent. Aggregate demand is strong, and bottlenecks and supply constraints are limiting how quickly production can respond. These supply disruptions have been larger, and longer lasting, than anticipated, exacerbated by waves of the virus here and abroad, and price pressures have spread to a broader range of goods and services. Additionally, higher energy prices are driving up overall inflation. The surge in prices of crude oil and other commodities that resulted from Russia’s invasion of Ukraine will put additional upward pressure on near term inflation here at home. We understand that high inflation imposes significant hardship, especially on those least able to meet the higher costs of essentials like food, housing, and transportation. We know that the best thing we can do to support a strong labor market is to promote a long expansion—and that is only possible in an environment of price stability. As we emphasize in our policy statement, with appropriate firming in the stance of monetary policy, we expect inflation to return to 2 percent while the labor market remains strong. That said, inflation is likely to take longer to return to our price stability goal than previously expected. The median inflation projection of FOMC participants is 4.3 percent this year and falls to 2.7 percent next year and 2.3 percent in 2024  this trajectory is notably higher than projected in December, and participants continue to see risks as weighted to the upside. The Fed’s monetary policy actions have been guided by our mandate to promote maximum employment and stable prices for the American people. Our policy has been adapting to the evolving economic environment, and it will continue to do so. As I noted, the Committee raised the target range for the federal funds rate by ¼ percentage point and anticipates that ongoing increases in the target range will be appropriate. The median projection for the appropriate level of the federal funds rate is 1.9 percent at the end of this year—a full percentage point higher than projected in December. Over the following two years, the median projection is 2.8 percent—somewhat higher than the median estimate of its longer run value. Of course, these projections do not represent a Committee decision or plan, and no one knows with any certainty where the economy will be a year or more from now. Reducing the size of our balance sheet will also play an important role in firming the stance of monetary policy. At our meeting that wrapped up today, the Committee made good progress on a plan for reducing our securities holdings, and we expect to announce the beginning of balance sheet reduction at a coming meeting. In making decisions about interest rates and the balance sheet, we will be mindful of the broader context in markets and in the economy, and we will use our tools to support financial and macroeconomic stability. As we noted in our policy statement, the implications of Russia’s invasion of Ukraine for the U.S. economy are highly uncertain. In addition to the direct effects from higher global oil and commodity prices, the invasion and related events may restrain economic activity abroad and further disrupt supply chains—which would create spillovers to the U.S. economy through trade and other channels. The volatility in financial markets, particularly if sustained, could also act to tighten credit conditions and affect the real economy. Making appropriate monetary policy in this environment requires a recognition that the economy often evolves in unexpected ways. We will need to be nimble in responding to incoming data and the evolving outlook. And we will strive to avoid adding uncertainty to what is already an extraordinarily challenging and uncertain moment. We are attentive to the risks of potential further upward pressure on inflation and inflation expectations. The Committee is determined to take the measures necessary to restore price stability. The American economy is very strong and well positioned to handle tighter monetary policy. To conclude, we understand that our actions affect communities, families, and businesses across the country. Everything we do is in service to our public mission. We at the Fed will do everything we can to achieve our maximum employment and price stability goals. Thank you. I look forward to your questions. . So I guess I would start by saying that, in my view, the probability of a recession within the next year is not particularly elevated. And why do I say that? Aggregate demand is currently strong, and most forecasters expect it to remain so. If you look at the labor market, [you find that it is] also very strong. Conditions are tight, and payroll job growth is continuing at very high levels. Household and business balance sheets are strong. And so all signs are that this is a strong economy and, indeed, one that will be able to flourish—not to say withstand, but certainly flourish—as well in the face of less accommodative monetary policy. So I guess that’s how I would say I’m looking at that. Of course, the objective is to achieve price stability while also sustaining a strong labor market. And that is our overall objective. But we do feel the economy is very strong and well positioned to withstand tighter monetary policy. . I don’t think that’s a big piece of it, actually. I think some of that is just an early assessment of the effects of spillovers from the war in Eastern Europe, which will hit our economy through a number of channels. Highly uncertain, but, you know, you’re looking at higher oil prices, higher commodity prices. It’ll be—we think that will weigh on GDP to some extent. So that’s part of what moved those assessments down. I don’t think—I mean, I think, generally, monetary policy works with a lag, so some of that would also be in there. But remember, as well, that 2.8 percent is still very strong growth. If we think that the potential growth rate of the economy is somewhere between, somewhere around 1.75 percent, 2.8 percent is strong economic growth. It would have been one of the strongest years, in fact, of the last expansion. So, while it’s lower than last year’s 5.8 percent, it’s still quite strong growth. So I would say it’s quite a strong forecast. . So, you know, the way we’re thinking about this is that every meeting is a live meeting. And we’re going to be looking at evolving conditions. And if we do conclude that it would be appropriate to move more quickly to remove accommodation, then we’ll do so. I can’t be perfectly specific about it, but that’s certainly a possibility as we go through the year. . So I guess I would say that at the—before the invasion of Ukraine by Russia—so let’s go back to that. I would have said that the expectation was that inflation would peak sometime in the first quarter, maybe the end of the first quarter of this year, and then maybe stay at that level or a little bit lower and then start to come down in the back half of the year. So now we’re, you know, we’re getting—we’re going—we’re already seeing a little bit of short  term upward pressure in inflation due to higher oil prices, natural gas [prices] a little bit but not so much for us since we have our own natural gas supply, other commodities prices. The other thing is that you’re seeing supply chain issues around shipping and around, you know, lots of countries and companies and people not wanting to touch Russian goods. So that’s going to mean more tangled supply chains. So that could actually push out [in time] the relief we were expecting on supply chains generally. So I guess I would say that the expectation is still that inflation will begin to come down in the second half of the year. But if you look at where I read the SEP headline median, we still expect inflation to be high this year, lower than last year, and then we expect—though, particularly with the effects of the war, but also the data we’ve seen so far this year—we expect inflation to remain high through the middle of the year, begin to come down, and then come down more sharply next year. . So that’s one of many ways of capturing the situation, which is that we—the Committee really does understand that the time for rate increases and for shrinking the balance sheet has come. And I would just say, I would go back to “the economy is very strong,” as I mentioned. Tremendous momentum in the labor market. We expect growth to continue. As I—it’s clearly time to raise interest rates and begin the balance sheet shrinkage. And I just wanted to say that as I looked around the table at today’s meeting, I saw a Committee that’s acutely aware of the need to return the economy to price stability and [is] determined to use our tools to do exactly that. You couched it in terms of real rates. I would say, if you look at the SEP, you’ve got people getting close to or even above, in many cases, their estimate of the longer run neutral rate. So I understand that doesn’t do it for real rates. But if you go out a year or two, many people are, in their forecasts, are having tight policy from a real interest rate standpoint. So that’s something that we’re focused on. Of course, it’s a highly uncertain environment. And, you know, we don’t know what’s going to happen. But we do know that we’re going to deploy our tools to achieve our goals—and that includes the price stability goal. . Okay, sorry. Tell me again your first question. . Okay. So part of inflation coming down at the very beginning is clearly to do with factors other than our policy, and those would include, potentially, the supply chain is getting a little bit better, certainly base effects. You’re lapping—as you know, when you look at a 12 month trailing window, you’re lapping very high inflation in March, April, May, June of last year. So there should be some effects from that in the 12 month picture. Really what we’re looking for, though, is month by month inflation coming down. And so it’s really, it’s all the things we’ve been talking about, you know, that really haven’t helped much, including the shift away from goods and back to services, including supply chains getting better, including labor force participation—all those things that have been sticky and not happening. But a big part of it is, though, is the base effects I mentioned as well. You know, I think monetary policy starts to bite on inflation, and on growth, with a lag, of course. And so you would see that more in ’23 and ’24. But also, remember we started talking about rate increases last year. For some months now, financial conditions have already incorporated a significant number of rate increases. So it doesn’t start today. The effect, the moves are already priced into the market for a few months now. So the clock is running on that, and I think some of that will be seen in the second half of the year as well. So on the regulatory portfolio, I would just say this. You know, we have an obligation to carry out under the law in supervision and regulation, and we’re doing that. That’s what we’re doing. The committee is not active. So what’s happening is, things are coming to the full Board, and we’re voting on them. We’re getting our business done. You know, we got the stress tests done. We’ve looked at, you know, a number of proposals for mergers and things like that. So we’re working ahead. Of course, we don’t have a Vice Chair for Supervision, as you mentioned. But we’re making do with the situation we have. And a good number of things have come straight to the Board for approval. . So I don’t—Neil, I’ve never talked about my own SEP projection. It’s in there, but I, you know, I think Fed Chairs have generally not done that, because we just haven’t done it. It’s because we’re, you know, we have to put together the consensus on the Committee and present that consensus. So I wouldn’t talk about my individual one. And in terms of the pacing of it, I would just point out that that is—there’s seven remaining meetings this year. This isn’t something we discuss or debate or agree on. But there’s seven remaining meetings, and there’s seven rate hikes. I would add there’s also the shrinkage of the balance sheet, which, you people do the math different ways, but that might be the equivalent of another rate increase just from the runoff of the balance sheet. So I don’t—but I don’t know. We haven’t made any decisions on front end loading or going steadily through the year. And, as I mentioned, you know, if you look at the SEP, a good number of participants do see more than seven or eight increases this year. And I can’t give you, I’m not going to try to give you a really specific test for what it would take to do that. But I will say this, that we’ll be looking at the data as they come in. We’ll be looking to see whether the data show expected improvement on inflation. We’ll be looking at the inflation outlook and making a judgement. And we’ll be going—each meeting is a live meeting. And if we conclude that it would be appropriate to raise interest rates more quickly, then we’ll do so. . So I just would say a couple things. We have the tools that we need, and we’re going to use them. And, as you can see, we have a plan over the course of this year to raise interest rates steadily and also to run off the balance sheet. We will take the necessary steps to ensure that high inflation does not become entrenched, while also supporting a strong labor market. And, as I mentioned, if we conclude that it would be appropriate to move more quickly, we’ll do so. I’ll leave it to others to make the judgment you asked for. . We lost you in the middle of the question. . None whatsoever. . Thank you. So, of course, that’s something we’re watching report by report. And we’re certainly, we noticed it in the last meeting. And it’s part of the overall picture. We have expected services inflation to move back up to where it was, and that’s part of what’s happening is, in the case of some services, prices are still getting back up to where they were before the crisis. In other cases, it’s pretty clear that inflation has spread more broadly across services. And, yes, that is concerning. In the meanwhile, we see some progress on the good side. But, really, in this latest report, it was confined to vehicles, which is, admittedly, a large category. So, you know, as I mentioned, the Committee acutely feels its obligation to move to make sure that we restore price stability and is determined to use its tools to do so. . Right. So our, if you look, our—first of all, there is no—you’re looking at medians. But understand that there’s no, it’s not something we voted on. It’s not a plan. But if you look, people do have their in—by the end of this year, broadly, people are at or close to or, in some cases, above their estimates of longer run neutral interest rate. Okay. So that should stop pushing—that should, in other words, that should be a removal of accommodation for monetary policy, basically. At the same time, we will have done significant balance sheet runoff. And you can think of that as further. In the next year, and just looking at the median, you’re now above the, you know, above the, what people estimate to be the longer run median. And also, in many people’s forecasts, that actually amounts to, you know, tight policy under, in real rates as well. So why does unemployment remain at 3.5 percent? You know, it—I mean, a couple points. One is the connection between—in the economy we had before the pandemic, the connection between inflation and the level of the unemployment rate was not very tight. But this is—clearly, what this is is an expectation that, really it amounts to that, the idea that wage increases, which are now running above the level that would be consistent over the long run with 2 percent inflation, will move back down to levels which are still very attractive, full economy kind of—full employment kind of wages, but not to a point where they’re pushing up inflation anymore. And, as I mentioned, there are a lot of factors causing inflation to come down. And, you know, the reality is, there are many, many moving pieces, and we don’t know what will actually happen. But no matter what happens, this is a Committee that is determined to use its tools to make sure that higher inflation does not become entrenched. And so we are determined on that front, and we’ll deal with what comes. This is a modal, or most likely, expectation. But we’ll deal with what comes, whether it’s better or worse. . Well, if you take a look at today’s labor market, what you have is 1.7 plus job openings for every unemployed person. So that’s a very, very tight labor market— tight to an unhealthy level, I would say. So, in principle, if you were—let’s say that our tools work about as you described, and the idea is, we’re trying to better align demand and supply, let’s just say in the labor market. So it would actually, if you were just moving down the number of job openings so that they were more like one to one, you would have less upward pressure on wages. You would have a lot less of a labor shortage, which is going on pretty much across the economy. We’re hearing from companies that they can’t hire enough people. They’re having a hard time hiring. So that’s really the thinking there, is, you know, these are fairly well understood channels, interest sensitive. And, basically, across the economy, we’d like to slow demand so that it’s better aligned with supply  give supply, at the same time, time to recover  and get into a better, you know, a better alignment of supply and demand. And that, over time, should bring inflation down. And I’ll say again, though, you know, we don’t have a perfect crystal ball about the future, and we’re prepared to use our tools as needed to restore price stability. You know, as I mentioned in my opening remarks, without price stability, there—you really can’t have a sustained period of maximum employment. It’s our—one of our most fundamental obligations is to maintain and restore, in this case, price stability. So we’re very committed to that. Of course, the plan is to restore price stability while also sustaining a strong labor market. That is our intention, and we believe we can do that. But we have to restore price stability. . It’s hard to say. You know, what we saw in the last cycle was that, over the course of a long, steady expansion, labor force participation outperformed expectations. And that was just a, you know, it was a tight labor market, but it wasn’t—it was nowhere near as tight as this labor market. But it was a tight labor market, and so people stayed in the labor force longer. It wasn’t so much people coming back in the labor force after retirement. That’s not something that happens, in the aggregate, very much. But, so that’s what was happening. And, you know, more labor force participation is tremendously welcome. And, of course, our policy does not in any way preclude that. This is a situation where wages have moved up at the highest rate in a very long time. And people are able to quit their jobs and move to better paying jobs in the same industry or different industries. So it’s a really attractive labor market for people. And once, you know, as we get past COVID well and truly, it becomes an even more attractive one. So we hope that that will lead to more labor supply. That’s a good thing for the country. It’s a good thing for people. And it also will, we think, help relieve some of the wage pressures that do put inflation more at risk. That last part is, we’ll have to see whether, empirically, it winds up, works out that way. But, in principle, it ought to help with inflation as well. It’s not the only thing we’re looking for, though, from inflation. We’re looking for help from a number of different places and, most importantly, from our own policy. . So, as you know, policy works through financial conditions. That’s how it reaches the real economy—by just the mechanisms you mentioned. And remember that the financial conditions we had for the last couple of years were a function not only of very aggressive, and appropriately so, fiscal policy, but also highly accommodative monetary policy—the monetary policy settings that we put in place at the worst parts of the pandemic. So it is very appropriate to move away from those. And, yes, that will lead to some tightening in financial conditions in the form of higher interest rates and just the sorts of things—we’re not targeting any one or more of those things, but financial conditions generally should move to a more normal level so that—because we know the economy no longer needs, or wants, these very highly accommodative, this stance, which, you know, so it’s time to move to a more normal setting of financial conditions, and we do that by moving monetary policy itself to more normal levels. . Well, yes. So I would say, we look at a broad range of financial conditions. And, of course, when we tighten monetary policy, we do expect that they will adjust in sync over time with monetary policy. It’s not any particular financial condition, but a broad range of financial conditions. They will reflect to some extent—they reflect any number of things. But, yes, we need our policy to transmit to the real economy. And it does so through financial conditions, which means that, as we tighten policy or remove accommodation so that it’s at least less accommodative, that broader financial conditions will also be less accommodative. . Yes. Thank you for asking. So, at our meeting today and yesterday, we made excellent progress toward agreeing on the parameters of a plan to shrink the balance sheet. And I’d say we’re now in a position to finalize and implement that plan so that we’ll actually begin a runoff at a coming meeting. And that could come as soon as our next meeting in May. That’s not a decision that we’ve made. But I would say that that’s how well our discussions went in the last two days. So a couple things just to add. We’ll be mindful of the broader financial and economic context when we make the decision on timing, and we always want to use our tools to support macroeconomic and financial stability. We want to avoid adding uncertainty to what’s a highly uncertain situation already. So all of that will go into the thinking of the timing around this. In terms of the—I would say this. I don’t want to get too much into the details, because we’re literally just finalizing them. But the framework is going to look very familiar to people who are familiar with the last time we did this. But it’ll be faster than the last time. And, of course, it’s much sooner in a cycle than last time. But it will look familiar to you. And I would also say that there’ll be—I’m sure there’ll be a more detailed discussion of our—in the minutes to our meeting that come out in three weeks, where I expect that it will lay out, you know, pretty much the parameters of what we’re looking at, which I think will look quite familiar. . Yes. So I want to clear one thing up again. And that is that nothing in our new framework or in the changes that we made has caused us to wait longer to raise interest rates. What we said in the framework changes was—and this was really a reflection of what had happened for the preceding couple of decades, actually. What we said was, if we see, you know, low unemployment, high employment, but we don’t see inflation, then we’re not going to raise rates ’til we actually see inflation. That’s what we said, and that was the sense of it. There was no sense in which, if we got a burst of really high inflation, we would wait to raise rates. That’s simply not in the framework. In fact, quite the contrary. The framework is all about anchoring inflation expectations at 2 percent. So I do hear this, you know, that the framework—really, we can’t blame the framework. It was a sudden, unexpected burst of inflation. And then it was the reaction to it, and it was what it was. But it was not in any way caused by or related to the framework. So, come to today. You know, I think our vision on this on the Committee is very, very clear. What we see is a strong labor market. We see a labor market with a lot of momentum, great job creation. And we see the underlying economy’s strong. Balance sheets are strong. Yes, there are threats to growth from, you know, from what’s going on in Eastern Europe. And, but, nonetheless, in the base case, there’s a pretty broad expectation of strong growth. But inflation is far above our target. And, you know, the help we’ve been expecting and other forecasters have been expecting from supply side improvement, labor force participation, bottlenecks, all those things getting better—it hasn’t come. And so we’re looking now to using our tools to restore price stability, and we’re committed to doing that. And you see that, I think, in the Summary of Economic Projections. And you see that in the decision we make, and you’ll continue to see it in the decisions we make, going forward. . The goal, of course, is to restore price stability while also sustaining a strong labor market. We have a dual mandate, and they’re sort of equal. But, as I said earlier, you know, price stability is an essential goal. In fact, it’s a precondition, really, for achieving the kind of labor market that we want, which is a strong and sustained labor market. We saw the benefits of a long expansion, a sustained labor market. It pulled people back in, and there were really no imbalances in the economy that threatened the long expansion. It, just, the pandemic arrived  it was just a completely exogenous event. So that’s how we’re thinking about it. We, of course, want to achieve, you know, price stability with a strong labor market. But we do understand also that, really, you can’t have maximum employment for any sustained period without price stability. So we need to focus on price stability particularly, because the labor market is so strong and the economy is so strong. We feel like the economy can handle tighter monetary policy. . Sure. So I guess I’d start by just assuring everyone that we’re fully committed to bringing inflation back down and also sustaining the economic expansion. We do understand that these higher prices, no matter what the source, have real effects on people’s well  being. And, really, high inflation takes a toll on everyone. But it’s really, especially, on people who use most of their income to buy essentials like food, housing, and transportation, where—I mean, we’ve all seen charts that show, if you’re a middle income person, you’ve got room to absorb some inflation. If you’re at the lower end of the income spectrum, it’s very hard because you’re spending most of your money already on necessities, and the price is going up. But it’s punishing for everyone. So it has been a difficult time for the economy. But we do anticipate that inflation will move back down, as I mentioned earlier. It may take longer than we like, but I’m confident that we’ll use our tools to bring inflation down. You asked about rates. So the way that works, I would explain, is, as we raise interest rates, that should gradually slow down demand for the interest sensitive parts of the economy. And so what we would see is demand slowing down, but just enough so that it’s better matched with supply. And that brings—that will bring inflation down over time. That’s our plan. . Well, that is—yes, indeed. I mean, as I just said, you know, I think we do understand very much, and we very much take to heart, that it’s our obligation to restore price stability. And, you know, we’ve had price stability for a very long time and maybe come to take it for granted. But now we see the pain. I’m old enough to remember what very high inflation was like. And, you know, we’re strongly committed as a Committee to not allowing this higher inflation to become entrenched and to use our tools to bring inflation back down to more normal levels, which—our target is 2 percent inflation. So we will do that. And I just would want people to understand that, and that’s—but the way we do that is by raising interest rates and by shrinking our balance sheet. And so financial conditions will become, at the margin, less supportive of various kinds of economic activity. That will slow the economy, while also allowing the labor market to remain very strong. And, you know, the good news is, the economy and the labor market are quite strong. And that means the economy, we think, can handle interest rate increases. . Well, I, you know, I say that our intention is to bring inflation back down to 2 percent, while still sustaining a strong labor market and that the economy is very strong. If you look at where forecasts are, people are forecasting growth that’s strong within the context of U.S. potential economic output. So—and we expect that to continue. And to the extent the data come in different, then, of course, our policy will adapt. But we do believe that our policy is the appropriate one for this forecast, and we believe that we can bring down inflation. We believe that we can do so while sustaining a strong labor market. The labor market is—it’s not strong in the ordinary sense of the word. We have not seen a labor market where there are 1.7 job openings for every unemployed person or where there, if you add job openings to those who are employed, that’s actually substantially a larger number than the size of the workforce, than the number of people who actually count themselves as in the workforce. So this is a situation where demand is higher than supply. And when that happens, prices go up. And they—so we need to use our tools to move supply and demand back. And we don’t think we need to do this alone. There will be other factors helping that happen. But we certainly are prepared to use our tools—and we will. . Well, so, of course, central bankers around the world are generally very in favor of these sanctions. But let me say this: Sanctions are really the business of the elected government, and that’s true everywhere. So the Administration and the Treasury Department, in particular, and other agencies—they create these sanctions. We’re there to provide technical expertise, but they’re not, it’s not our decisions. And so I’m reluctant to comment on sanctions really much because, again, they’re not for us [to decide]. We have a very specific mandate. And these are really the province of elected governments, as I mentioned. So I’d have to leave it at that. Sorry. . So the way I would say it is this: We, first of all, I would agree with the premise that wages moving up is a great thing. You know, that’s how the standard of living rises over time. And, generally, it’s driven over long periods by rising productivity. But what we have now, if you look at these, the wage increases that we have, we look at a—we’re blessed with a range of measures of wages that all measure different things. But right now, they’re all showing the same thing, which is that the increases—not the levels, but the increases—are running at levels that are well above what would be consistent with 2 percent inflation, our goal, over time. And that may be—we don’t know how persistent that phenomenon will be. It’s very hard to say. And that’s really, I think, the sense of your question about a wage–price spiral  is that something that’s going to start happening and become entrenched in the system? We don’t see that. You can see, for example, in some sectors that got very high wage increases early on, those wage increases looked like they may have slowed down to a normal level. But it comes back to, you know, what I’m saying here—which is, there’s a misalignment of demand and supply, particularly in the labor market. And that is leading to wages moving up at ways that are not consistent with 2 percent inflation over time. And so we need to use our tools to, you know, guide inflation back down to 2 percent. And that would be in the context of an extraordinarily strong labor market. We think this labor market can handle, as I mentioned, tighter monetary policy. And the overall economy can as well. But, yes, wages are moving up faster than is consistent with 2 percent inflation, but it’s good to see that moving up. But it wouldn’t be sustainable over too long of a period to see them moving up that much higher. And that’s because of this misalignment between supply and demand. We expect to get more labor supply. We did last time. We got more than we expected during the last cycle. This time, we’ve gotten much less than expected. So it’s not easy to predict these things. But we do expect that we’ll get people coming back in the labor market, particularly as COVID becomes less and less of a factor in many people’s lives, something we all wish. But, so that’s how we think about it. . Right. So we are not—we don’t have the luxury of 20/20 hindsight in actually implementing real time decisions in the world. So, you know, so the question is—the right question is, did you make the right decisions based on what you knew at the time? But that’s not the question I was answering, which is knowing what you know now. So I think if we knew now—of course, if we knew now that these supply blockages, really, and the inflation resulting from them in collision with, you know, very strong demand, if we knew that that was what was going to happen, then in hindsight, yes. It would have been appropriate to move earlier. Obviously, it would be. But, again, we don’t have that luxury. And then, so, but that’s a separate question from your other question, which is “behind the curve.” And, you know, I don’t have the luxury of looking at it that way. You know, we are, we have our tools—powerful tools—and the Committee is very focused on using them. We’re acutely aware of the need to restore price stability while keeping a strong labor market. And what I saw today was a Committee that is strongly committed to achieving price stability, in particular, and prepared to use our tools to do that. We’re not going to let high inflation become entrenched. The costs of that would be too high. And we’re not going to wait so long that we have to do that. No one wants to have to really put restrictive monetary policy on, in order to get inflation back down. So, frankly, the need is one of getting back up, getting rates back up to more neutral levels as quickly as we practicably can and then moving beyond that, if that turns out to be appropriate. And, as you can see, it is appropriate in the sense that, [in] people’s [contributions to the] SEPs, they do write down levels of interest rates that are above their estimate of the longer run neutral rate. And there’s also a range of estimates, too, as you will see if you look at the details of the SEP. But thanks for your question. . Thank you.

****FOMCpresconf20220504

. Good afternoon. It’s nice to see everyone in person for the first time in a couple years. Before I go into the details of today’s meeting, I’d like to take this opportunity to speak directly to the American people. Inflation is much too high, and we understand the hardship it is causing, and we’re moving expeditiously to bring it back down. We have both the tools we need and the resolve that it will take to restore price stability on behalf of American families and businesses. The economy and the country have been through a lot over the past two years and have proved resilient. It is essential that we bring inflation down if we are to have a sustained period of strong labor market conditions that benefit all. From the standpoint of our Congressional mandate to promote maximum employment and price stability, the current picture is plain to see: The labor market is extremely tight, and inflation is much too high. Against this backdrop, today the FOMC raised its policy interest rate by ½ percentage point and anticipates that ongoing increases in the target rate for the federal funds rate will be appropriate. In addition, we are beginning the process of significantly reducing the size of our balance sheet. I’ll have more to say about today’s monetary policy actions after briefly reviewing economic developments. After expanding at a robust 5½ percent pace last year, overall economic activity edged down in the first quarter. Underlying momentum remains strong, however, as the decline largely reflected swings in inventories and net exports—two volatile categories whose movements last quarter likely carry little signal for future growth. Indeed, household spending and business fixed investment continued to expand briskly. The labor market has continued to strengthen and is extremely tight. Over the first three months of the year, employment rose by nearly 1.7 million jobs. In March, the unemployment rate hit a post pandemic, and near five decade, low of 3.6 percent. Improvements in labor market conditions have been widespread, including for workers at the lower end of the wage distribution as well as for African Americans and Hispanics. Labor demand is very strong, and, while labor force participation has increased somewhat, labor supply remains subdued. Employers are having difficulties filling job openings, and wages are rising at the fastest pace in many years. Inflation remains well above our longer run goal of 2 percent. Over the 12 months ending in March, total PCE prices rose 6.6 percent  excluding the volatile food and energy categories, core PCE prices rose 5.2 percent. Aggregate demand is strong, and bottlenecks and supply constraints are limiting how quickly production can respond. Disruptions to supply have been larger, and longer lasting, than anticipated, and price pressures have spread to a broader range of goods and services. The surge in prices of crude oil and other commodities that resulted from Russia’s invasion of Ukraine is creating additional upward pressure on inflation. And COVID related lockdowns in China are likely to further exacerbate supply chain disruptions as well. Russia’s invasion of Ukraine is causing tremendous loss and hardship, and our thoughts and sympathies are with the people of Ukraine. Our job is to consider the implications for the U.S. economy, which remain highly uncertain. In addition to the effects on inflation, the invasion and related events are likely to restrain economic activity abroad and further disrupt supply chains, creating spillovers to the U.S. economy through trade and other channels. The Fed’s monetary policy actions are guided by our mandate to promote maximum employment and stable prices for the American people. My colleagues and I are acutely aware that high inflation imposes significant hardship, especially on those least able to meet the higher costs of essentials like food, housing, and transportation. We are highly attentive to the risks that high inflation poses to both sides of our mandate, and we are strongly committed to restoring price stability. Against the backdrop of the rapidly evolving economic environment, our policy has been adapting, and it will continue to do so. At today’s meeting, the Committee raised the target range for the federal funds rate by ½ percentage point and stated that it “anticipates that ongoing increases in the target range will be appropriate.” We also decided to begin the process of reducing the size of our balance sheet, which will play an important role in firming the stance of monetary policy. We are on a path to move our policy rate expeditiously to more normal levels. Assuming that economic and financial conditions evolve in line with expectations, there is a broad sense on the Committee that additional 50 basis point increases should be on the table at the next couple of meetings. We will make our decisions meeting by meeting as we learn from incoming data and the evolving outlook for the economy. And we will continue to communicate our thinking as clearly as possible. Our overarching focus is using our tools to bring inflation back down to our 2 percent goal. With regard to our balance sheet, we also issued our specific plans for reducing our securities holdings. Consistent with the principles we issued in January, we intend to significantly reduce the size of our balance sheet over time in a predictable manner by allowing the principal payments from our securities holdings to roll off the balance sheet, up to monthly cap amounts. For Treasury securities, the cap will be $30 billion per month for three months and will then increase to $60 billion per month. The decline in holdings of Treasury securities under this monthly cap will include Treasury coupon securities and, to the extent that coupon securities are less than the monthly cap, Treasury bills. For agency mortgage backed securities, the cap will be $17.5 billion per month for three months and will then increase to $35 billion per month. At the current level of mortgage rates, the actual pace of agency MBS runoff would likely be less than this monthly cap amount. Our balance sheet decisions are guided by our maximum  employment and price stability goals. And, in that regard, we will be prepared to adjust any of the details of our approach in light of economic and financial developments. Making appropriate monetary policy in this uncertain environment requires a recognition that the economy often evolves in unexpected ways. Inflation has obviously surprised to the upside over the past year, and further surprises could be in store. We therefore will need to be nimble in responding to incoming data and the evolving outlook. And we will strive to avoid adding uncertainty to what is already an extraordinarily challenging and uncertain time. We are highly attentive to inflation risks. The Committee is determined to take the measures necessary to restore price stability. The American economy is very strong and well positioned to handle tighter monetary policy. To conclude: We understand that our actions affect communities, families, and businesses across the country. Everything we do is in service to our public mission. We at the Fed will do everything we can to achieve our maximum employment and price stability goals. Thank you, and I look forward to your questions. . Thank you. So you’re right—3.6 percent unemployment is just about as low as it’s been in 50 years. And I would say that I expect, and Committee members generally expect, that we’ll get some additional participation. So people will be coming back into the labor force. We’ve seen that particularly among prime age people. And that will, of course, tend to hold the unemployment rate up a little bit. I would also expect, though, that job creation will slow. Job creation has been, you know, more than half a million per month in recent months—very, very strong, particularly for this stage of the economy. And so we think— with fiscal policy less supportive, with monetary policy less supportive, we think that job creation will slow as well. So it is certainly possible that the unemployment would go down further. But so I would expect those to be relatively limited because of the additional supply and also just the slowing in job creation. Implications for inflation—really, the wages matter a fair amount for companies, particularly in the service sector. Wages are running high, the highest they’ve run in quite some time. And they are one good example, or good illustration, really, of how tight the labor market really is, the fact that wages are running at the highest level in many decades. And that’s because of an imbalance between supply and demand in the labor market. So we think through our policies—through further healing in the labor market, higher rates, for example, of vacancy filling and things like that, and more people coming back in—we’d like to think that supply and demand will come back into balance and that, therefore, wage inflation will moderate to still high levels of wage increases, but ones that are more consistent with 2 percent inflation. That’s our expectation. Your third question was? . So I guess I would say it this way: There’s a path. There’s a path by which we would be able to have demand moderate in the labor market and therefore have vacancies come down without unemployment going up, because vacancies are at such an extraordinarily high level. There’re 1.9 vacancies for every unemployed person, 11.5 million vacancies, 6 million unemployed people. So we haven’t been in that place on the vacancy, sort of the vacancy/unemployed curve, the Beveridge curve. We haven’t been at that sort of level of a ratio in the modern era. So, in principle, it seems as though by moderating demand, we could see vacancies come down and, as a result—and they could come down fairly significantly and, I think, put supply and demand at least closer together than they are. And that would give us a chance to get inflation down, get wages down, and then get inflation down without having to slow the economy and have a recession and have unemployment rise materially. So there’s a path to that. Now, I would say, I think we have a good chance to have a soft or softish landing or outcome, if you will. And I’ll give you a couple of reasons for that. One is, households and businesses are in very strong financial shape. You’re looking at, you know, excess savings on balance sheets—excess in the sense that they’re substantially larger than the prior trend. Businesses are in good financial shape. The labor market is, as I mentioned, very, very strong. And so it doesn’t seem to be anywhere close to a downturn. Therefore, the economy is strong and is well positioned to handle tighter monetary policy. So, but I’ll say, I do expect that this will be very challenging  it’s not going to be easy. And it may well depend, of course, on events that are not under our control. But our job is to use our tools to try to achieve that outcome, and that’s what we’re going to do. . Sure. So a 75 basis point increase is not something the Committee is actively considering. What we are doing is, we raised [the funds rate by] 50 basis points today. And we’ve said that, again, assuming that economic and financial conditions evolve in ways that are consistent with our expectations, there’s a broad sense on the Committee that additional 50  basis point increases should be on the table for the next couple of meetings. So we’re going to make those decisions at the meetings, of course, and we’ll be paying close attention to the incoming data and the evolving outlook as well as to financial conditions. And, finally, of course, we will be communicating to the public about what our expectations will be as they evolve. So the test is really just as I laid it out—economic and financial conditions evolving broadly in line with expectations. And, you know, I think expectations are that we’ll start to see inflation, you know, flattening out—and not necessarily declining yet, but we’ll see more evidence. We’ve seen some evidence that core PCE inflation is perhaps either reaching a peak or flattening out. We’ll want to know more than just some evidence. We’ll want to really feel like we’re making some progress there. And we’re going to make these decisions, and there’ll be a lot more information. I just think we want to see that information as we get there. It’s a very difficult environment to try to give forward guidance 60, 90 days in advance. There are just so many things that can happen in the economy and around the world. So, you know, we’re leaving ourselves room to look at the data and make a decision as we get there. . I don’t think the one month is—no. No. One month’s reading doesn’t tell us much. You know, we‘d want to see evidence that inflation is moving in a direction that gives us more comfort. As I said, we’ve got two months now where core inflation is a little lower, but we’re not looking at that as a reason to take some comfort. You know, I think we need to really see that our expectation is being fulfilled—that inflation, in fact, is under control and starting to come down. But, again, it’s not like we would stop. We would just go back to 25 basis point increases. It’ll be a judgment call when these meetings arrive. But, again, our expectation is, if we see what we expect to see, then we would have 50 basis point increases on the table at the next two meetings. . So—neutral. When we talk about the neutral rate, we’re really talking about the rate that neither pushes economic activity higher nor slows it down. So it’s a concept, really. It’s not something we can identify with any precision. So we estimate it within broad bands of uncertainty. And the current estimates on the Committee are sort of 2 to 3 percent. And also, that’s a longer run estimate. That’s an estimate for an economy that’s at full employment and 2 percent inflation. So, really, what we’re doing is, we’re raising rates expeditiously to what we see as the broad range of plausible levels of neutral. But we know that there’s not a bright line drawn on the road that tells us when we get there. So we’re going to be looking at financial conditions, right? Our policy affects financial conditions, and financial conditions affect the economy. So we’re going to be looking at the effect of our policy moves on financial conditions. Are they tightening appropriately? And then we’re going to be looking at the effects on the economy. And we’re going to be making a judgment about whether we’ve done enough to get us on a path to restore price stability. It’s that. So if that path happens to involve levels that are higher than estimates of neutral, then we will not hesitate to go to those levels. We won’t. But, again, there’s a sort of false precision in the discussion that we as policymakers don’t really feel. You know, you’re going to raise rates, and you’re going to be kind of inquiring how that is affecting the economy through financial conditions. And, of course, if higher rates are required, then we won’t hesitate to deliver them. . We don’t really see strong evidence of that yet, but that does not in any way make us comfortable. I think if you look at short term inflation expectations, they’re quite elevated. And you can look at that and say, “Well, that’s because people expect inflation to come down.” And, in fact, inflation expectations [at longer horizons] come down fairly sharply. Longer term inflation expectations have been reasonably stable but have moved up to—but only to levels where they were in 2014, by some measures. So you can look at that. And I think that’s a fair description of the picture. But it’s really about the risks. We don’t see a wage–price spiral. We see that companies have the ability to raise prices, and they’re doing that, but there have been price shocks. So I just think it takes you back to the basic point—was that we know we need to expeditiously move our policy rate up to ranges of more normal, neutral levels. And we need to look around and keep going if we don’t see that financial conditions have tightened adequately or that the economy is behaving in ways that suggest that we’re not where we need to be. So, again, you don’t see those things yet, but I would say there’s no basis for feeling comfortable about that. It’s a risk that we simply can’t run. We can’t allow a wage–price spiral to happen. And we can’t allow inflation expectations to become unanchored. It’s just something that we can’t allow to happen, and so we’ll look at it that way. . Well. So our tools don’t really work on supply shocks. Our tools work on demand. And to the extent we can’t affect, really, oil prices or other commodity prices or food prices and things like that, so we can’t affect those. But there’s a job to do on demand. And that—you can see that in the labor market, where demand is substantially in excess of supply of workers. And you can see it in the product markets as well. But I guess I’m just pointing out that—a couple of things. For both the situation in Ukraine and the situation in China, they’re likely to, both, add to headline inflation. And people are going to be suffering from that, you know. People almost suffer more from food and energy shocks then, but—even though they don’t actually tell us much about the future path. So the second thing is that they’re both capable of preventing further progress in supply chains healing or even making supply chains temporarily worse. So they’re going to weigh on the process of global supply chain healing, which is going to affect broader inflation, too. So, in a way, they’re two further negative shocks that have hit really in the last, you know, 60 days, 90 days. . So, you know, I’ll just say: For now, we’re focused on doing the job we need to do on demand, and there’s plenty to be done there. Again, if you look at it, it’s essentially almost two to one, job vacancies to unemployed people. There’s a lot of excess demand. There’re more than 5 million more employed plus job openings than there are the size of the labor force. So there’s an imbalance there that we have to do our work on. A very difficult situation—you know, you would look at core inflation, which wouldn’t include the commodity price shocks. And, you know, that’s one of the reasons we would tend to focus on that, because we can have more of an effect on that, but it would be a very difficult situation. I mean, we have to be sure that inflation expectations remain anchored. And I mean, that’s part of our job, too, so we’d be watching that carefully. And it puts any central bank in a very difficult situation. . Okay, so in terms of the vacancies to unemployment ratio, we don’t have a goal in mind. There’s no specific number that we’re saying, “We’ve got to get to that.” It’s really, you’ve got to get to a place where the labor market appears to be more in balance. And that depends not only on the level of those things—it also, it depends on how well the matching functions in the labor markets are working. Because, you know, the longer these expansions go on, you can get very efficient with all of that, and the Beveridge curve shifts out. And that also tends to, you know, to help. So there isn’t a specific number. I will say we were— you know, I think, I think when we got to one to one in the, you know, in the late teens, we thought that was a pretty good number. But, again, we’re not shooting for any particular number. What we’d like to see is progress, but we’re not really looking at that. That’s an intermediate variable. We’re looking at wages, and we’re looking at, ultimately, inflation. So, you know, there are a bunch of channels through which policy works. You can think of it as, you know, interest sensitive spending, and then you can think of another big one as asset values broadly. And, you know, there’re big models with, you know, a lot of different channels that are related to that. You know, we don’t focus on any one market—the equity market or the housing market—we focus on financial conditions broadly. So we wouldn’t be targeting any one market, as you suggest, for going up or down or taking a view on whether it’s at a good level or a bad level. We just would be looking at very broad measures of financial conditions—all the different financial conditions indexes, for example, which include equity. But they also include debt and other, many other things—credit spreads, things like that—too. . So, first, the first thing to say is that we understand. And some of us are old enough to have lived through high inflation, and many aren’t. But it’s very unpleasant. It’s just something people don’t—when they experience it for the first time, you’re paying more for the same thing. If you’re a normal economic person, then you probably don’t have that much extra to spend. And it’s immediately hitting your spending on groceries, on, you know, on gasoline, on energy, and things like that. So we understand the pain involved. So how do you get out of that? And it’s our job to make sure that inflation of that unpleasant, high nature doesn’t get entrenched in the economy. That’s what we’re here for, one of the main things we’re here for—perhaps the most fundamental thing we’re here for. And the way we do that is, we try to get supply and demand back in sync with each other, back in balance, so that the economy is under less stress and inflation will go down. Now, the process of getting there involves higher rates—so higher mortgage rates, higher borrowing rates, and things like that. So it’s not going to be pleasant either. But in the end, everyone is better off. Everyone— particularly people on fixed incomes and at the lower part of the income distribution are better off with stable prices. And so we need to do everything we can to restore stable prices. We’ll do it as quickly and effectively as we can. We think we have a good chance to do it without a significant increase in unemployment or, you know, a really sharp slowdown. But, ultimately, we think about the medium and longer term, and everyone will be better off if we can get this job done—the sooner, the better. . So the economy is doing fairly well. We expect growth to be solid this year. And we see, you know, household spending and business investment as fairly strong— and even in the first quarter, which was relatively slow on some other fronts. So, and the labor market—if you look at the labor market, for people who are out of work and looking, there are lots of job opportunities for—wages are moving up and at rates that haven’t been seen in quite a long time. So it’s a good time to be a worker looking to, you know, either change jobs or get a wage increase in your current job. So it’s a strong economy, and nothing about it suggests that it’s close to, or vulnerable to, a recession. Now, of course, given events around the world and fading fiscal policy effects and higher rates, you could see some slower economic activity. Certainly, it will not be—last year was an extraordinarily strong growth year as we recovered from the pandemic. As I mentioned, growth [was] over 5 percent. But most forecasters have growth this year at, you know, at a solid pace above 2 percent. . So, and as I said, I think we have a good chance to restore price stability without a recession—without, you know, a severe downturn  without materially high, higher unemployment. And I mentioned the reasons for that. So I see a strong economy now. I see a very strong labor market, for example. Businesses can’t find the people to hire—they can’t find them. So, typically, in a recession, you would have unemployment. Now you have surplus demand. So there should be room, in principle, to reduce that surplus demand without putting people out of work. The issue will come that we don’t have precision surgical tools. We have, essentially, interest rates, the balance sheet, and forward guidance, and they’re famously blunt tools. They’re not capable of surgical precision. So I would agree. No one thinks this will be easy, no one thinks it’s straightforward, but there is certainly a plausible path to this, and I do think we’ve got a good chance to do that. And, you know, our job is not to rate the chances—it is to try to achieve it. So that’s what we’re doing. There are a range of opinions, though, and that’s only appropriate. . You know, it’s really the Fed that has responsibility for price stability. And we take whatever arrives at the Fed in terms of fiscal activity, we take it as a given, and we don’t evaluate it—it’s not our job, really. We don’t have an oversight function there. And we look at it as our job, given all the factors that are happening, to try to sustain maximum employment and price stability. So if Congress or the Administration has ways to help with inflation, I would encourage that, but I’m not going to get into making recommendations or anything like that. It’s not, it’s really not our role—we need to stay in our lane and do our job. When we get inflation back under control, then maybe I can, you know, give other people advice [laughter]. Right now, we need to focus on, just focus on doing our job. And I’ll stick to that. Stick in our lane. . So I think it’s certainly possible that we’ll need to move policy to levels that we see as restrictive as opposed to just neutral. We can’t know that today. That decision is not in front of us today. If we do conclude that we need to do that, then we won’t hesitate to do it. I’ll say again, there’s no bright line, you know, that you’re stepping over. You’re really looking at what our policy stance is and what the market is forecasting for it. You’re looking at financial conditions and how that’s affecting the economy and making a judgment. You know, we won’t be arguing about whose model of the neutral rate is better than the other one. It’s much more about a practical application of our policy tools. And we’re absolutely prepared to do that. It—wouldn’t hesitate if that’s what it takes. So I am, of course—who isn’t an admirer of Paul Volcker? I shouldn’t be singled out in this respect. But I knew him just a little bit and have tremendous admiration for him. And I— But I would phrase it this way: He had the courage to do what he thought was the right thing. That’s what it was. It wasn’t a particular thing. It was that he always did—he always did—what he thought was the right thing. If you read his last autobiography, that really comes through. So that’s [what] the test is. It isn’t, will we do one particular thing? I would say, we do see, though—we see restoring price stability as absolutely essential for the country in coming years. Without price stability, the economy doesn’t work for anybody, really. And so it’s really essential, particularly for the labor market. If you think about it, like if you look at the last cycle, we had a very, very—longest expansion cycle in our recorded history. In the last two, three years, you had the benefits of this tight labor market going to people in the lower quartiles. And it was, you know, racial, wealth, and income—not wealth, but income gaps were coming down, wage gaps. So it’s a really great thing. We’d all love to get back to that place. But to get back to anything like that place, you need price stability. So, basically, we’ve been hit by historically large inflationary shocks since the pandemic. This isn’t anything like regular business. This is, we have a pandemic, we have the highest unemployment, you know, in—since the Depression. Then we have this outsized response from fiscal policy and monetary policy. Then we have inflation. Then we have a war in Ukraine, which is cutting the commodity, you know, patch in half. And now we have these shutdowns in China. So it’s been a series of inflationary shocks that are really different from anything people have seen in 40 years. So we have to look through that and look at the economy that’s coming out the other side. And we need to somehow find price stability out of this. And it’s obviously going to be very challenging, I think, because you do have, you know, numerous supply shocks, which are famously difficult to deal with. So I guess that’s how I think about it. . So I didn’t—if I said “necessary,” I meant to say “appropriate.” We’re not going to be erecting a high barrier for this. It’s more, if we think it’s appropriate. You know, the point is, we’re a very long way from neutral now. We’re moving there expeditiously, and we’ll continue to do so. And we can’t make that decision, really, today. The decision for about how high to go will be on the table to be made when we reach neutral. And, you know, I expect we’ll get there expeditiously, as I’ve mentioned. So it’s not that we don’t want to—making that decision today wouldn’t really mean anything. But I’ll say again, if we do believe that it’s appropriate to go to those levels, we won’t hesitate. . So, why June 1? It was just, pick a date, you know, and that happened to be the date that we picked. It was—nothing magic about it. You know, it’s not going to have any macroeconomic significance over time. We just picked that. Sometimes we publish these calendars on the first day of the month, and that’s what we’re doing. I wouldn’t read anything into it. In terms of the effect, I mean, I would just stress how uncertain the effect is of shrinking the balance sheet. You know, we run these models—and everyone does in this field—and make estimates of what will be, how do you measure, you know, a certain quantum of balance sheet shrinkage compared to quantitative easing? And, you know, these are very uncertain. I really can’t be any clearer. There won’t be any clearer [estimates]. You know, people estimate that, broadly, on the path we’re on—and this will be taken, probably, too seriously—but sort of ¼ percent, one rate increase over the course of a year at this pace. But I would just say, with very wide uncertainty bands—very wide. We don’t really know. There are other estimates that are much smaller than that, by the way. And some of you may read about that. That’s kind of a mainstream estimate. We know that it is part of returning to more normal, more neutral financial conditions. And, you know, our strategy is to set up a plan and have it operate and really have, you know, have the interest rate be the active tool of monetary policy. In terms of speaking to the American people, so I feel like sometimes I just want to remind us, really, that that’s who we work for, and that it’s inflation that people are feeling all over the country. And it’s very important that they know that we know how painful it is and that we are working hard on fixing it. I thought it was quite important to do that. And so that was really the thinking behind that. . No, I don’t. And a good example of why would be—in the fourth quarter of last year, as we started talking about tapering sooner and then raising rates this year, you saw financial markets reacting, you know, very appropriately. Not to bless any particular day’s measure, but the way financial markets, the forward rate curve has tightened in response to our guidance and our actions really amplifies our policy. It’s—monetary policy is working through expectations now, to a very large extent. We’ve only done two rate increases. But if you look at financial conditions, the two year [rate] is at 280 [basis points] now. In September, I think it was at 20 basis points. And that’s all through the economy. People are feeling those higher rates already. And so that shows that the markets think that our forward guidance is credible. And I think we want to keep it that way. . Well, so, as I mentioned, you can see places where the demand is substantially in excess of supply. And what you’re seeing as a result of that is prices going up and at unsustainable levels, levels that are not consistent with 2 percent inflation. And so what our tools do is that as we raise interest rates, demand moderates: it moves down. Interest rates, you know—businesses will invest a little bit less, consumers will spend a little bit less. That’s how it works. But, ultimately, getting those, getting supply and demand back, you know, back in balance, is what gives us 2 percent inflation, which is what gives the economy a footing where people can lead successful economic lives and not worry about inflation. I mean, so, yes, there may be some pain associated with getting back to that. But, you know, the big pain over time is in not dealing with inflation and allowing it to become entrenched. . So, look, I think what you’ve seen is—really, I would say, in the middle of last fall—there was a time when our policy stance was still pretty much in sync with what the data were saying. If you remember, there were a couple of weak jobs reports. And inflation—month by month, inflation had come down till September, a few months in a row, stayed low. And then around the end of October, we got three or four really strong readings that just said, no, this is a much stronger economy. And by the way—then, with the restatement of the jobs numbers, it looked like the job market was much more even and stronger in the second half of the year. But that hadn’t happened yet. Anyway, we got an ECI reading—employment compensation, [employment cost] index reading—the Friday before the November meeting. Then we got a really strong jobs report. Then we got a really high CPI report. And so I think it became clear to the Committee that we needed to adjust and adapt. And we have. Ever since then, really ever since then, we’ve been adapting. We, you know—the Committee moved by the time of the December meeting to a median [in participants’ 2022 projections] of three rate increases, then to a median of seven increases at the March meeting. And that process is going on. And it’s clearly continuing. And that’s why I say—and I actually mentioned this at the March meeting—that no one should look at any single SEP as sort of a real resting place for 90 days, because we’re in a fast evolving situation. And that’s what’s happened. You can see— unanimous vote today, of course. And I told you the guidance—that broad support on the Committee to have 50 basis point hikes on the table at the next couple of meetings. So you’re right. And by the way, other forecasters have been doing the same thing. And it’s just us adapting to the data and to the situation and using our tools to deal with it. . So unemployment rates for all racial groups have come down a lot and are now much closer to where they were before the pandemic hit. So that’s one thing I would say. And that’s important. But the bigger point is this: I do not, at this time, see the two sides of the mandate as in tension. I don’t, because you can see that the labor market is out of balance. You can see that there’s a labor shortage. There aren’t enough people to fill these job openings. And companies can’t hire, and wages are moving up at levels that would not, over time, be consistent with 2 percent inflation over time. And, of course, everyone loves to see wages go up. And it’s a great thing, but you want them to go up at a sustainable level, because these wages are, to some extent, being eaten up by inflation. So, what that really means is, to get the kind of labor market we really want to get, we really want to have a labor market that serves all Americans, especially the people in the lower income part of the distribution, especially them. To do that, you’ve got to have price stability. And we’ve got to get back to price stability so that we can have a labor market where people’s wages aren’t being eaten up by inflation and where we can have a long expansion, too. That’s—the good things you can have, as we have. We’ve had—several of the longest expansions in U.S. history have been in the last 40 years, and that’s because it’s been a time of low inflation. And long expansions are good for people and good for the labor market. So that’s the way I think about it. I think we—you know, our tools work. We have to think in the, in the medium and longer term. And I do think that the best thing for everyone is for us to get back to price stability to support, really, a sustained period of strong labor market conditions. Thanks very much.

****FOMCpresconf20220615

. Good afternoon. I will begin with one overarching message: We at the Fed understand the hardship that high inflation is causing. We are strongly committed to bringing inflation back down, and we’re moving expeditiously to do so. We have both the tools we need and the resolve that it will take to restore price stability on behalf of American families and businesses. The economy and the country have been through a lot over the past two and a half years and have proved resilient. It is essential that we bring inflation down if we are to have a sustained period of strong labor market conditions that benefit all. From the standpoint of our congressional mandate to promote maximum employment and price stability, the current picture is plain to see: The labor market is extremely tight, and inflation is much too high. Against this backdrop, today the Federal Open Market Committee raised its policy interest rate by ¾ percentage point and anticipates that ongoing increases in that rate will be appropriate. In addition, we are continuing the process of significantly reducing the size of our balance sheet. I’ll have more to say about today’s monetary policy actions after briefly reviewing economic developments. Overall economic activity edged down in the first quarter, as unusually sharp swings in inventories and net exports more than offset continued strong underlying demand. Recent indicators suggest that real GDP growth has picked up this quarter, with consumption spending remaining strong. In contrast, growth in business fixed investment appears to be slowing, and activity in the housing sector looks to be softening, in part reflecting higher mortgage rates. The tightening in financial conditions that we’ve seen in recent months should continue to temper growth and help bring demand into better balance with supply. As shown in our Summary of Economic Projections, FOMC participants have marked down their projections for economic activity, with the median projection for real GDP growth running below 2 percent through 2024. The labor market has remained extremely tight, with the unemployment rate near a 50 year low, job vacancies at historical highs, and wage growth elevated. Over the past three months, employment rose by an average of 408,000 jobs per month, down from the average pace seen earlier in the year but still robust. Improvements in labor market conditions have been widespread, including for workers at the lower end of the wage distribution as well as for African Americans and Hispanics. Labor demand is very strong, while labor supply remains subdued, with the labor force participation rate little changed since January. FOMC participants expect supply and demand conditions in the labor market to come into better balance, easing the upward pressures on wages and prices. The median projection in the SEP for the unemployment rate rises somewhat over the next few years, moving from 3.7 percent at the end of this year to 4.1 percent in 2024, levels that are noticeably above the March projections. Inflation remains well above our longer run goal of 2 percent. Over the 12 months ending in April, total PCE prices rose 6.3 percent  excluding the volatile food and energy categories, core prices rose 4.9 percent. In May, the 12 month change in the consumer price index came in above expectations at 8.6 percent, and the change in the core CPI was 6 percent. Aggregate demand is strong, supply constraints have been larger and longer lasting than anticipated, and price pressures have spread to a broad range of goods and services. The surge in prices of crude oil and other commodities that resulted from Russia’s invasion of Ukraine is boosting prices for gasoline and food and is creating additional upward pressure on inflation. And COVID related lockdowns in China are likely to exacerbate supply chain disruptions. FOMC participants have revised up their projections for inflation this year, particularly for total PCE inflation given developments in food and energy prices. The median projection is 5.2 percent this year and falls to 2.6 percent next year and 2.2 percent in 2024. Participants continue to see risks to inflation as weighted to the upside. The Fed’s monetary policy actions are guided by our mandate to promote maximum employment and stable prices for the American people. My colleagues and I are acutely aware that high inflation imposes significant hardship, especially on those least able to meet the higher costs of essentials like food, housing, and transportation. We are highly attentive to the risks high inflation poses to both sides of our mandate, and we are strongly committed to returning inflation to our 2 percent objective. Against the backdrop of the rapidly evolving economic environment, our policy has been adapting, and it will continue to do so. At today’s meeting, the Committee raised the target range for the federal funds rate by ¾ percentage point, resulting in a 1½ percentage point increase in the target range so far this year. The Committee reiterated that it anticipates that ongoing increases in the target range will be appropriate. And we are continuing the process of significantly reducing the size of our balance sheet—which plays an important role in firming the stance of monetary policy. Coming out of our last meeting in May, there was a broad sense on the Committee that a ½ percentage point increase in the target range should be considered at this meeting if economic and financial conditions evolved in line with expectations. We also stated that we were highly attentive to inflation risks and that we would be nimble in responding to incoming data and the evolving outlook. Since then, inflation has again surprised to the upside, some indicators of inflation expectations have risen, and projections for inflation this year have been revised up notably. In response to these developments, the Committee decided that a larger increase in the target range was warranted at today’s meeting. This continues our approach of expeditiously moving our policy rate up to more normal levels. And it will help ensure that longer term inflation expectations remain well anchored at 2 percent. As shown in the SEP, the median projection for the appropriate level of the federal funds rate is 3.4 percent at the end of this year, 1.5 percentage points higher than projected in March and 0.9 percentage point above the median estimate of its longer run value. The median projection rises further to 3.8 percent at the end of next year and declines to 3.4 percent in 2024, still above the median longer run value. Of course, these projections do not represent a Committee plan or decision, and no one knows with any certainty where the economy will be a year or more from now. Over coming months, we will be looking for compelling evidence that inflation is moving down, consistent with inflation returning to 2 percent. We anticipate that ongoing rate increases will be appropriate  the pace of those changes will continue to depend on the incoming data and the evolving outlook for the economy. Clearly, today’s 75 basis point increase is an unusually large one, and I do not expect moves of this size to be common. From the perspective of today, either a 50 basis point or a 75 basis point increase seems most likely at our next meeting. We will, however, make our decisions meeting by meeting, and we will continue to communicate our thinking as clearly as we can. Our overarching focus is using our tools to bring inflation back down to our 2 percent goal and to keep longer term inflation expectations well anchored. Making appropriate monetary policy in this uncertain environment requires a recognition that the economy often evolves in unexpected ways. Inflation has obviously surprised to the upside over the past year, and further surprises could be in store. We therefore will need to be nimble in responding to incoming data and the evolving outlook. And we will strive to avoid adding uncertainty in what is already an extraordinarily challenging and uncertain time. We are highly attentive to inflation risks and determined to take the measures necessary to restore price stability. The American economy is very strong and well positioned to handle tighter monetary policy. To conclude: We understand that our actions affect communities, families, and businesses across the country. Everything we do is in service to our public mission. We at the Fed will do everything we can to achieve our maximum employment and price stability goals. Thank you. And I look forward to your questions. . So, as you know, we always aim to provide as much clarity as we can about our policy intentions subject to the inherent uncertainty in the economic outlook, because we think monetary policy is more effective when market participants understand how policy will evolve, when they understand our objective function, our reaction function. And in the current highly unusual circumstances with inflation well above our goal, we think it’s helpful to provide even more clarity than usual—again, subject to uncertainty in the outlook. And I think over the course of this year, financial markets have responded and have, generally, shown that they understand the path we’re laying out. Of course, it remains data dependent. And so that’s what we generally think about guidance, and that’s why we offer it. And, of course, when we offered that—when I offered that guidance at the last meeting, I did say that it was subject to the economy performing about in line with expectations. I also said that if the economy performed—if data came in worse than expected, then we would consider moving even more aggressively. So we got the CPI data and also some data on inflation expectations late last week, and we thought for a while, and we thought, well, this is the appropriate thing to do. So then the question is, what do you do? And do you wait six weeks to do it at the next meeting? And I think the answer is, that’s not where we are with this. So we decided we needed to go ahead, and so we did. And that’s really—that’s really how we made the decision. . Sure. So if you take a step back, what we’re looking for is compelling evidence that inflationary pressures are abating and that inflation is moving back down. And we’d like to see that in the form of a series of declining monthly inflation readings— that’s what we’re looking for. And, by this point, we had actually been expecting to see clear signs of at least inflation flattening out and, ideally, beginning to decline. We’ve said that we’d be data dependent, focused on incoming data, highly attentive to inflation risks—the things that I mentioned to Howard moments ago. So contrary to expectations, inflation again surprised to the upside. Indicators—some indicators of inflation expectations have risen, and projections of [inflation] this year have moved up notably. So we thought that strong action was warranted at this meeting, and today we delivered that in the form of a 75 basis point rate hike, as I mentioned. So the point of it, really, is this: We’ve been moving rates up expeditiously to more normal levels, and over the course of the seven months since we pivoted and began moving in this direction, we’ve seen financial conditions tighten, and appropriately so. But the federal funds rate, even after this move, is at 1.6 percent. So, again, the Committee is moving rates up expeditiously to more normal levels, and we came to the view that we’d like to do a little more front end loading on that. So I think that the SEP gives you the levels that people think are appropriate at given points in time. This was really about the speed in which we would get there. So, as I mentioned, 75 basis points today—I said the next meeting could well be about a decision between 50 and 75. That would put us, at the end of the July meeting, in that range—in that more normal range, and that’s a desirable place to be, because you begin to have more optionality there about the speed with which you would proceed going forward. Just talking about the SEP for a second: What it really says is that Committee participants widely would like to see policy at a modestly restricted—restrictive level at the end of this year. And that’s six months from now, and so much data [can accrue] and so much can happen, so remember how highly uncertain this is. But so that is generally a range of 3 to 3½ percent. That’s where people are, and that’s what they want to see, knowing what they know now and understanding that we need to be—we need to show resolve but also be flexible [in responding] to incoming data as we see it. If things are better, we don’t need to do that much, and if they’re not, then we either do that much or possibly even more. But in any case, it will be very data dependent. Then you’re looking at next year, and what you’re seeing is, people see more—a bit more tightening and a range of maybe 3½ to 4 percent. And that’s generally what people see as the appropriate path for getting inflation under control and starting back down and getting back down to 2 percent. So 75 basis points seemed like the right thing to do at this meeting, and that’s what we did. . Sure. So the question really is, how high does the rate really need to go? And this is—the estimates on the Committee are in that range of 3½ to 4 percent. And how do you think about that? Well, you can think about the longer run neutral rate, you can compare it to that, and we think that’s in the mid 2s. You can look, frankly, at broader financial conditions. You can look at asset prices, you can look at the effect they’re having on the economy, rates, asset prices, credit spreads—all of those things go into that. You can also look at the yield curve and ask, all along the yield curve, where is the policy rate? So for much of the yield curve now, real rates are positive. That’s not true at the short end. At the short end of the yield curve in the early years, you don’t have real—you have negative rates still. So that really is one data point—it’s one part of financial conditions. So I think—I have to look at it this way: We move the policy rate. That affects financial conditions. And that affects the economy. We have, of course, ways—rigorous ways to think about it, but, ultimately, it comes down to, do we think financial conditions are in a place where they’re having the desired effect on the economy? And that desired affect is, we’d like to see demand moderating. Demand is very hot still in the economy. We’d like to see the labor market getting better in balance between supply and demand, and that can happen [as a result of developments coming] both from supply and demand. Right now, there’s—demand is substantially higher than available supply, though, so we feel that there’s a role for us in moderating demand. Those are the things we can affect with our policy tools. There are many things we can’t affect, and those would be, you know, the things—the commodity price issues that we’re having around the world due to the war in Ukraine and the fallout from that, and also just all of the supply side things that are still pushing upward on inflation. So that’s really how I think—how I think about it. . I think it’s certainly in the range of plausible numbers. I think we’ll know when we get there really. I mean, honestly, though, that would be—you would have positive real rates, I think, and inflation coming down by then. I think you’d have positive real rates across the [yield] curve. I think that the neutral rate is pretty low these days. So I would think it would, but you know what? We’re going to find that out empirically. We’re not going to be completely model driven about this. We’re going to be looking at this, keeping our eyes open, and reacting to incoming data both on financial conditions and on what’s happening in the economy. . So if you look at a broad range of inflation expectations—so you’ve got the public, you’ve got surveys of the public and of experts, and you’ve also got market based. And I think if you look across that broad range of data, what you see is that expectations are still in the place, very much in the place, where short term inflation is going to be high but comes down sharply over the next couple of years. And that’s really where inflation expectations are. And also, as you get away from this episode, they get back down close to 2 percent. And so this is really very important to us—that that remain the case. And I think if you look for most measures, most of the time, that’s what you see. If we even see a couple of indicators that bring that into question, we take that very seriously. We do not take this for granted—we take it very seriously. So the preliminary Michigan [survey] reading—it’s a preliminary reading  it might be revised—nonetheless, it was quite eye catching, and we noticed that. We also noticed that the index of common inflation expectations at the Board has moved up after being pretty flat for a long time, so we’re watching that, and we’re thinking, “this is something we need to take seriously.” And that is one of the factors, as I mentioned—one of the factors in our deciding to move ahead with 75 basis points today was what we saw in inflation expectations. We’re absolutely determined to keep them anchored at 2 percent. That was one of the reasons—the other was just the CPI reading. . We’re going to—I’ll just say, we’re going to react to the incoming data and appropriately, I think. So I wouldn’t want to put a number on what that might be. The main thing is to get rates up, and then pretty soon, we’ll be in an area where we’re—I think as you get closer to the end of the year, you’re in a range where you’ve got restrictive policy, which is appropriate. Forty year highs in inflation—we think that policy is going to need to be restrictive, and we don’t know how restrictive. So I think that’s how we’ll take it. . To take your second question first, yes. I mean, I think we’re— again, we’re going, we’re resolved to take this on, but we’re going to be flexible in the implementation of it. Sorry—and your [first] question was [about] guidance. So, again, the overall exercise is that we try to be—provide as much clarity about our policy intentions as we can, because we think that makes monetary policy work better. There’s always a tradeoff, because you have to live with that guidance, and so you do it, and it helps a lot of the time. I, frankly, think this year has been a demonstration of how well it can work. With us having really just done very little in the way of raising interest rates, financial conditions have tightened quite significantly through the expectations channel, as we’ve made it clear what our plans are. So I think that’s been a very healthy thing to be happening. And I would hope that our—it’s always going to be—any guidance that we give is always going to be subject to things working out about as we expect. And, in this particular situation, you know, we’re looking for something specific, and that is progress on inflation. We want to see progress. We want to see—inflation can’t go down until it flattens out, and that’s what we’re looking to see. And if we don’t see that, then that’s the kind of thing that will—even if we don’t see progress for a longer period, that could cause us to react. But we will. Soon enough, we will be seeing some progress at some point. And we’ll react [as] appropriate to that, too. But I would like to think, though, that our guidance is still credible, but it’s always going to be conditional on what happens. This is an unusual situation, to get, you know, some data late in, during blackout, pretty close to—very close to our meeting. Very unusual to [have] one that would actually change the outcome. So I’ve only seen—in my 10 years plus here at the Fed, I’ve only seen something like that, even close to that, one or two times. So I don’t think it’s something that’ll come up a great deal. . The second part I didn’t get. . Right. So, what we want to see is a series of declining monthly readings for inflation, and we’d like to see inflation headed down. But, you know—and right now, our policy rate is well below neutral, right? So, soon enough, we’ll have our policy rate— let’s assume the world works out about like the SEP says: The policy rate will be up where we think it should be. And then the question would be: Do you slow down? Does it make you— you’ll be making these judgments about, is it appropriate now to slow down—from 50 to 25, let’s say—or speed up? So that’s the kind of thinking we’ll be doing, and, again, we’re looking—ultimately, we’re not going to declare victory until we see a series of these, really see convincing evidence, compelling evidence, that inflation is coming down. And that’s what I mean by—that’s what it would take for us to say, “Okay, we think this job is done.” Because we saw—and, frankly, we saw last year—inflation came down over the course of the summer and then turned right around and went back up. So I think we’re going to be careful about declaring victory. But our—again, the implementation of our policy is going to be flexible and sensitive to incoming data. . Again, I think that—I do think that our objective, and this is what’s reflected in the SEP, but our objective, really, is to bring inflation down to 2 percent while the labor market remains strong. I think that what’s becoming more clear is that many factors that we don’t control are going to play a very significant role in deciding whether that’s possible or not. And there I’m thinking, of course, of commodity prices, the war in Ukraine, supply chain [developments], things like that, where we really—the monetary policy stance doesn’t affect those things. But having said that, there is a path for us to get there—it’s not getting easier  it’s getting more challenging because of these external forces—and that path is to move demand down, and you have a lot of surplus demand. Take, for example, in the labor market. So you have two job vacancies, essentially, for every person actively seeking a job, and that has led to a real imbalance in wage negotiating. You could get to a place where that ratio was at a more normal level, and you wouldn’t—you would expect to see those wage pressures move back down to a level where people are still getting healthy wage increases, real wage increases, but at a level that’s consistent with 2 percent inflation. So that’s a possibility. And you could say the same thing about some of the product markets where there’s just excess capacity and really where the strong demand has gone into—sorry, where they’re capacity constrained, right? So you have, effectively, what we think of as a vertical supply curve or close to it. So demand comes in, and it’s very strong, and it shows up in higher prices—not higher quantities, not more cars, because they can’t make the cars because they don’t have the semiconductors. So in principle, that could work in reverse. When demand comes down, you could see—and it’s not guaranteed—but you could see prices coming down more than the typical economic relationships that you see in the textbooks would suggest, because of the unusual situation we’re in on the supply side. So there’s a pathway there. It is not going to be easy, and there—again, it’s our objective, but, as I mentioned, it’s going to depend to some extent on factors we don’t control. . So you’re right. In the SEP, we have unemployment going up to 4 point—the median is 4.1 percent—of course, [there is] a range of actual forecasts. And I would characterize that, if you were to get inflation down to, you know, on its way down to 2 percent and the unemployment rate went up to 4.1 percent, that’s still a historically low level. We hadn’t seen—we hadn’t seen rates, unemployment rates below 4 percent until a couple years ago for—we’d seen it for, like, one year in the last 50. So the idea that—3.6 percent is historically low in the last century. So a 4.1 percent unemployment rate with inflation well on its way to 2 percent—I think that would be—I think that would be a successful outcome. So we’re not looking to have a higher unemployment rate. But I would say that I would certainly look at that as a successful outcome. . We’re not—again, we’re not, we don’t seek to put people out of work, of course. We never think, “Too many people are working, and fewer people need to have jobs.” But we also think that you really cannot have the kind of labor market we want without price stability. And we have to go back and establish price stability so we can have that kind of labor market, and that’s a labor market where workers are getting wage increases—maybe the workers at the lower end of the spectrum are getting the biggest wage increases, as they were before the pandemic—where participation is high, where there’s lots of job opportunities, where it’s just a really—I mean, the labor market we had before the pandemic was—that’s what we want to get back to. And you see disparities between various groups at historic lows. We’d love to get back to that place. But, to get there—it’s not going to happen with the levels of inflation we have. So we have to restore that, and it really is in service, in the medium and longer term, of the kind of labor market we want and hope to achieve. . Not trying to induce a recession now. Let’s be clear about that. We’re trying to achieve 2 percent inflation consistent with a strong labor market. That’s what we’re trying to do. So let me talk about that sentence. Clearly, it’s our goal to bring about 2 percent inflation while keeping the labor market strong, right? And that’s kind of what the SEP says. The SEP has inflation getting down to 2, a little above 2 percent in 2024, with unemployment at 4.1 percent. And this is a strong labor market—this is a good labor market. And, as I mentioned, there are pathways to do it. But those pathways have become much more challenging due to factors that are not under our control. Again, thinking here of the fallout from the war in Ukraine, which has brought a spike in prices of energy, food, fertilizer, industrial chemicals, and also just the supply chains more broadly, which have been larger and longer lasting than anticipated. So the sentence that we deleted said that we believe that appropriate monetary policy, effectively alone, can bring about the result of 2 percent inflation with a strong labor market. And so much of it is really not down to monetary policy. It just didn’t—the sentence isn’t—it kind of says on its face that monetary policy alone can do this. And that’s not—that just didn’t seem appropriate, so we took the sentence out. . Well, yeah, I think you’ve seen—again, we’ve been expecting progress, and we didn’t get that. We got sort of the opposite. So I also think the situation, really—since the consequences of the Ukraine war become more and more clear, what you’re seeing is the situation getting more difficult. And you look around the world—I mean, lots of countries are—lots of countries are looking at inflation of 10 percent, and it’s largely due to commodities prices. But all over the world, you’re seeing these effects. And so—and we’re seeing them here: gas prices at all time highs, and things like that. That’s not something we can do something about. So that is really—and, by the way, headline inflation, headline inflation is important for expectations. People—the public’s expectations, why would they be distinguishing between core inflation and headline inflation? Core inflation is something we [on the Committee] think about because it is a better predictor of future inflation. But headline inflation is what people experience. They don’t know what core is. Why would they? They have no reason to. So that’s—expectations are very much at risk due to high headline inflation. So it’s become—the environment has become more difficult, clearly, in the last four or five months, and hence the need for the policy actions that we took today. Hence our resolution to get rates up and, ultimately, get them to where we think they need to be in coming months. . So we’re, of course, watching very, very carefully for that and looking at the retail—the big store numbers and all that kind of thing. And so I—but I think the fair summary of what we see is, you see continuing shifts in consumption, you see some things getting—sales going down, but overall spending is very strong. The consumer’s in really good shape financially. They’re spending. There’s no sign of a broader slowdown that I can see in the economy. People are talking about it a lot—consumer confidence is very low. That’s probably related to gas prices and also just stock prices to some extent for other people. But that’s what we’re seeing. We’re not seeing a broad slowdown. We see job growth slowing, but it’s still at quite robust levels. We see the economy slowing a bit but still growth levels—healthy growth levels. . It would be hard to watch anything much more closely than we watch consumer spending, but we watch everything. We watch business fixed investment, which actually has softened a bit. And we watch—we’re responsible for watching everything. Consumption is 60 some percent of the economy, two thirds of the economy, so, naturally, we spend a lot of time on that. And, again, there’s a lot going on—there are a lot of flows back and forth—but, ultimately, it does appear that the U.S. economy is in a strong position and well positioned to deal with higher interest rates. . So the—we’re responsible for inflation in the law. And inflation means headline inflation. So that’s our ultimate goal. We, of course, like all central banks do, look very, very carefully at core inflation because it is—it’s a much better predictor, and it’s much—it’s a much better predictor of where inflation is going, and it’s also more relevant to our tools. As I mentioned, the parts that don’t go into core are mostly outside the scope of our tools, so we look at that. But it’s—the current situation is particularly difficult because of what I mentioned about expectations. We can’t affect, really—I mean, the energy prices are set by global commodity prices. And most of food—not all of it, but most food prices are pretty heavily influenced by global commodity prices, too. Also other things. So we can’t really have much of an effect. But we have to be mindful of the potential effect on inflation expectations [coming] from headline [inflation readings]. So it’s a very difficult situation to be in, and we— again, we can’t do much about the difference between [headline and core inflation rates due to] the elements that make up headline that are not in core. . The SEP is of one piece. It reflects all of the economic readings. It also reflects the 75 basis point increase. This is important. So people had that in hand when they—when their SEPs were submitted. So it’s—in other words, it’s not in addition to what’s in the SEP. The SEP—everyone’s SEP reflects their thinking about this rate increase and what’s going forward. . So I think the role that we can play—maybe the way to get at this is to say that the role that we can play is around demand, right? And we’ll be able to see—the areas that we can affect are those associated with excess demand, and we’ll be able to see our effect on, for example, job openings in real time. And that would tell us what’s—that would tell us about wages. Wages are not principally responsible for the inflation that we’re seeing, but, going forward, they would be very important, particularly in the service sector. Sorry, I’m not sure I’m getting to your question. . There’s always a risk of going too far or going not far enough, and it’s going to be a very difficult judgment to make, or maybe not—maybe it’ll be really clear. But we’re—and we’re quite mindful of the dangers. But I will say, the worst mistake we could make would be to fail, which—it’s not an option. We have to restore price stability. We really do, because everything—it’s the bedrock of the economy. If you don’t have price stability, the economy’s really not going to work the way it’s supposed to. It won’t work for people—their wages will be eaten up. So we want to get the job done. This inflation happened relatively recently. We don’t think that it’s affecting expectations in any kind of fundamental way. We don’t think that we’re seeing a wage–price spiral. We think that the public generally sees us as very likely to be successful in getting inflation down to 2 percent, and that’s critical. It’s absolutely key to the whole thing that we sustain that confidence. So that’s how we’re thinking about it. . So, clearly, people don’t like inflation—a lot. And many people are experiencing it, really, for the first time, because we haven’t had anything like this kind of inflation in 40 years. And it’s really something people don’t like. And they’re experiencing that, and that’s showing up in their—in surveys and in all kinds of ways. And we understand that, and we understand the hardship that people are experiencing from high inflation, and we’re determined to do what we can to get inflation back down. So that’s really what we’re saying. We’re not—I’m not—clearly, it’s an incredibly unpopular thing, and it’s very painful for people. I guess what I’m saying is, the question, the really critical question from the perspective of doing our job is making sure that the public does have confidence that we have the tools and will use them and they do work to bring inflation back down over time. It will take some time, we think, to get inflation back down, but we will do that. . So, as I mentioned, I think, in my opening statement, inflation has started—it started off in quite narrow, very directly pandemic related areas, and it’s spread now broadly across the economy and into the services sector as well. It was really in the goods sector at the beginning. And, particularly, you’re seeing in travel now, if you’ve flown on a plane lately—planes are very full, and plane tickets are very expensive. Some of that will be pass  through of energy prices, but it’s—so you’re experiencing services inflation. Shelter inflation is high. So the question—and then you see the Cleveland measure going up, and many other measures are going up. So it’s a time when we’re not seeing progress and we want to see progress, and that’s really another part of why we did what we did today and why the SEP looks like it does. We see it as appropriate to get the policy rate up to restrictive levels, which would be, in the thinking of the Committee, somewhere in the range of 3 to 3½ percent by year end. And then after that, you see what the rest of the SEP says. So I hope that’s responsive to your question. . So I think what’s in the SEP would certainly meet that test. If you see—you’re looking at getting back down to almost a 2 percent inflation by 2024, and the unemployment rate is still as low as 4.1 percent. That would be—I would call that as meeting that test. Do I still think that we can do that? I do. I think there’s—I think there’s—I don’t want to be the handicapper here. I just—that is our objective, and I do think it’s possible. Like I said, though, I think that events of the last few months have raised the degree of difficulty, created great challenges. And, again, the answer to the question, can we still do it—there’s a much bigger chance now that it’ll depend on factors that we don’t control, which is, fluctuations and spikes in commodity prices could wind up taking that option out of our hands. So we just don’t know, but we’re focused on—very, very focused on getting inflation back down to 2 percent, which we think is essential for the benefit of the public and also to put us on a path back to a sustainably strong labor market like the one we had before the pandemic. . Sure. So, as I mentioned, financial conditions have tightened over the last seven months, and that’s a good thing, we think. But the federal funds rate, even after this increase, is at 1.6 percent. So it’s hard to see how that is too high of a rate. And even if we did another—so we’re going to get here by the end of the summer, somewhere in the 2s probably. Still, that’s still a low rate. So that’s not a rate that is calculated to bring a recession on. And we’ll—by then, we’ll have seen a whole lot more data. As I mentioned a couple times, the Committee’s views are around a modestly restrictive stance, which will be in the 3 to 3½ percent range by the end of this year, but that’s conditioned on that being the appropriate thing to do. If we see data going in a different direction, it’ll be reflected in our policy, as you see today. We’ll be watching—if things go in a direction we don’t expect, then we’re going to adapt. And I would say, this is a highly uncertain environment—extraordinarily uncertain environment. So, again, we’ll be determined and resolved, but flexible. . Sorry, what was your question on QT? . So, of course, we’ve been looking very carefully and hard at why inflation picked up so much more than expected last year and why it proved so persistent. We— it’s hard to overstate the extent of interest we have in that question morning, noon, and night. But you have to understand the context. For—really, the context is this: For decades before the pandemic and the reopening, you had a world where inflation was dominated by disinflationary forces such as declining population or aging demographics, let’s call it that, globalization enabled by technology, other factors, low productivity. So and that’s how all the models work is, decades and decades of data—they look at that. It’s a very flat Philips curve world, and the supply shocks tend to be transient, right? So we have now experienced an extraordinary series of shocks, if you think about it: the pandemic, the response, the reopening, inflation, followed by the war in Ukraine, followed by shutdowns in China—the war in Ukraine potentially having effects for years here. So we’re aware that a different set of forces are driving the economy—we have been, obviously, for quite a while. But this is a different—these forces are different. Inflation is behaving differently, and, in our thinking, it really is a question of very strong demand. But you couldn’t get this kind of inflation without a change on the supply side, which is there for anybody to see, which is these blockages and shortages and people dropping out of the labor force and things like that. So that’s how we’re looking at it. And we’ve done a lot of work internally on, and thinking about, what all that means. You don’t—the thing is, you don’t know whether those forces are—to what extent are they going to be sustained? In other words, will we go back to a world where it looks a little more like the old world, or are we really going to be in a world where major supply shocks go on and on? The history is, you see these waves of supply shocks, as you did in the ’70s, and then they go away, and sort of there’s a “new normal,” and things settle down. But, honestly, we don’t know what that’s going to be. In the meantime, we have to find price stability in this new world and maximum employment in this new world where, clearly, inflationary forces are—you’re seeing them everywhere. Again, if you look around the world at where inflation levels are, it’s absolutely extraordinary. It’s not just here. In fact, we’re sort of in the middle of the pack, although I think we have, of course, a different kind of inflation than other people have, partly because our economy is stronger and more highly recovered. So that’s what we’re doing. We’ve done a lot of introspection and work on that and—sorry, on QT, we’ve communicated really clearly to the markets about what we’re going to do there. Markets seem to be okay with it. We’re phasing in—Treasury [security] issuance is down quite a lot, quite a lot from where it’s been, so I have no reason to think—markets are forward looking, and they see this coming. I have no reason to think it will lead to illiquidity and problems. It seems to be kind of understood and accepted at this point. . Sure. So rates were very low—a good place to start is that rates were very, very low for quite a while because of the pandemic and the need to do everything we could to support the economy when unemployment was 14 percent and the true unemployment rate was well higher than that. And that was a—rates are low, and now they’re coming back up to more normal, or above, levels. So, in the meantime, while rates were low and while demand was really high, obviously demand for housing changed from wanting to live in urban areas to some extent to living in single family homes in the suburbs, famously. And so the demand was just suddenly much higher. And we saw prices moving up very, very strongly for the last couple of years. So that changes now, and rates have moved up—we’re well aware that mortgage rates have moved up a lot—and you’re seeing a changing housing market. We’re watching it to see what will happen. How much will it really affect residential investment? Not really sure. How much will it affect housing prices? Not really sure. It’s—I mean, obviously, we’re watching that quite carefully. You would think over time—I mean, so there’s a tremendous amount of supply in the housing market of unfinished homes, and as those come on line—whereas the supply of finished homes, inventory of finished homes that are for sale, is incredibly low, historically low. So it’s still a very tight market. So prices may keep going up for a while even in a world where rates are up. So it’s a complicated situation. We watch it very carefully. I would say if you’re a homebuyer, somebody or a young person looking to buy a home, you need a bit of a reset. We need to get back to a place where supply and demand are back together and where inflation is down low again and mortgage rates are low again. So this will be a process whereby we—ideally, we do our work in a way that the housing market settles in a new place and housing availability and credit availability are at appropriate levels. So thank you very much.

****FOMCpresconf20220727

. Good afternoon. My colleagues and I are strongly committed to bringing inflation back down, and we’re moving expeditiously to do so. We have both the tools we need and the resolve it will take to restore price stability on behalf of American families and businesses. The economy and the country have been through a lot over the past two and a half years and have proved resilient. It is essential that we bring inflation down to our 2 percent goal if we are to have a sustained period of strong labor market conditions that benefit all. From the standpoint of our congressional mandate to promote maximum employment and price stability, the current picture is plain to see: The labor market is extremely tight, and inflation is much too high. Against this backdrop, today the FOMC raised its policy interest rate by ¾ of a percentage point and anticipates that ongoing increases in the target range for the federal funds rate will be appropriate. In addition, we are continuing the process of significantly reducing the size of our balance sheet. And I’ll have more to say about today’s monetary policy actions after briefly reviewing economic developments. Recent indicators of spending and production have softened. Growth in consumer spending has slowed significantly, in part reflecting lower real disposable income and tighter financial conditions. Activity in the housing sector has weakened, in part reflecting higher mortgage rates. And after a strong increase in the first quarter, business fixed investment also looks to have declined in the second quarter. Despite these developments, the labor market has remained extremely tight, with the unemployment rate near a 50 year low, job vacancies near historical highs, and wage growth elevated. Over the past three months, employment rose by an average of 375,000 jobs per month—down from the average pace seen earlier in the year, but still robust. Improvements in labor market conditions have been widespread, including for workers at the lower end of the wage distribution as well as for African Americans and Hispanics. Labor demand is very strong, while labor supply remains subdued, with the labor force participation rate little changed since January. Overall, the continued strength of the labor market suggests that underlying aggregate demand remains solid. Inflation remains well above our longer run goal of 2 percent. Over the 12 months ending in May, total PCE prices rose 6.3 percent  excluding the volatile food and energy categories, core PCE prices rose 4.7 percent. In June, the 12 month change in the consumer price index came in above expectations at 9.1 percent, and the change in the core CPI was 5.9 percent. Notwithstanding the recent slowdown in overall economic activity, aggregate demand appears to remain strong, supply constraints have been larger and longer lasting than anticipated, and price pressures are evident across a broad range of goods and services. Although prices for some commodities have turned down recently, the earlier surge in prices of crude oil and other commodities that resulted from Russia’s war on Ukraine has boosted prices for gasoline and food, creating additional upward pressure on inflation. The Fed’s monetary policy actions are guided by our mandate to promote maximum employment and stable prices for the American people. My colleagues and I are acutely aware that high inflation imposes significant hardship, especially on those least able to meet the higher costs of essentials like food, housing, and transportation. We are highly attentive to the risks high inflation poses to both sides of our mandate, and we are strongly committed to returning inflation to our 2 percent objective. At today’s meeting, the Committee raised the target range for the federal funds rate by ¾ of a percentage point, bringing the target range to 2¼ to 2½ percent. And we’re continuing the process of significantly reducing the size of our balance sheet, which plays an important role in firming the stance of monetary policy. Over coming months, we will be looking for compelling evidence that inflation is moving down, consistent with inflation returning to 2 percent. We anticipate that ongoing increases in the target range for the federal funds rate will be appropriate  the pace of those increases will continue to depend on the incoming data and the evolving outlook for the economy. Today’s increase is the—in the target range is the second 75 basis point increase in as many meetings. While another unusually large increase could be appropriate at our next meeting, that is a decision that will depend on the data we get between now and then. We will continue to make our decisions meeting by meeting and communicating—and communicate our thinking as clearly as possible. As the stance of monetary policy tightens further, it likely will become appropriate to slow the pace of increases while we assess how our cumulative policy adjustments are affecting the economy and inflation. Our overarching focus is using our tools to bring demand into better balance with supply in order to bring inflation back down to our 2 percent goal and to keep longer term inflation expectations well anchored. Making appropriate monetary policy in this uncertain environment requires a recognition that the economy often involves—evolves in unexpected ways. Inflation has obviously surprised to the upside over the past year, and further surprises could be in store. We therefore will need to be nimble in responding to incoming data and the evolving outlook. And we will strive to avoid adding uncertainty in what is already an extraordinarily challenging and uncertain time. We are highly attentive to inflation risks and determined to take the measures necessary to return inflation to our 2 percent longer run goal. This process is likely to involve a period of below  trend economic growth and some softening in labor market conditions. But such outcomes are likely necessary to restore price stability and to set the stage for achieving maximum employment and stable prices over the longer run. To conclude: We understand that our actions affect communities, families, and businesses across the country. Everything we do is in service to our public mission. We at the Fed will do everything we can to achieve our maximum employment and price stability goals. Thank you. I look forward to your questions. . Sure. So we did judge that a 75 basis point increase was the right magnitude in light of the data and in the context of the ongoing increases in the policy rate that we’ve been making. I’d say that we wouldn’t hesitate to, to make an even larger move than we did today if the Committee were to conclude that that was—that that were appropriate. That was not the case at this meeting. There was very broad support for the move that we made. You mentioned the—the June meeting. We, we had said many times that we were prepared to move aggressively, more aggressively, if inflation continued to disappoint. And that’s why we did move to a more aggressive pace at the June meeting, as we said we would do. At this meeting, we continued at that more aggressive pace, as inflation has continued to disappoint, in the form of the June CPI reading. . So I guess I’d start by saying we’ve been saying we would move expeditiously to get to the range of neutral. And I think we’ve done that now. We’re at—we’re at 2.25 to 2.5 [percent], and that’s right in the range of what we think is neutral. So the question is, how are we thinking about the path forward? So one thing that hasn’t changed is that—won’t change—is that our focus is continuing to—is going to continue to be on using our tools to bring demand back into better balance with supply in order to bring inflation back down. That’ll continue to be our overarching focus. We also said that we expect ongoing rate hikes will be appropriate and that we’ll make decisions meeting by meeting. So what are we going to be looking at? You know, we’ll be looking at the incoming data, as I mentioned, and that’ll start with economic activity. Are we seeing the slowdown that we—the slowdown in economic activity—that we think we need? And there’s some evidence that we are at this time. Of course, we’ll be looking at labor market conditions. And we’ll be asking whether we see the alignment between supply and demand getting better, getting closer. Of course, we’ll be looking closely at inflation. You mentioned headline and core. Our mandate is for headline, of course  it’s not for core. But we look at core because core is, is actually a better indicator of headline and of all inflation going forward. So we’ll be—we’ll be looking at both. And we’ll be looking at them for—at those both, really—for what they’re saying about the outlook rather than just simply for, for what they say. But we’ll be asking: Do we see inflationary pressures declining? Do we see actual readings of inflation coming down? So, in light of all that data, the question we’ll be asking is whether the stance of policy we have is sufficiently restrictive to bring inflation back down to our 2 percent target. And it’s also worth noting that these rate hikes have been large, and they’ve come—they’ve come quickly. And it’s likely that their full effect has not been felt by the economy. So there’s probably some additional tightening, significant additional tightening, in the pipeline. So where are we going with this? I think the best—I think the Committee broadly feels that we need to get policy to at least to a moderately restrictive level. And maybe the best data point for that would be what we wrote down in our SEP at the—at the June meeting. So I think the median [federal funds rate] for the end of this year, the median would’ve been between 3¼ and 3½ [percent]. And, then, people wrote down 50 basis points higher than that for 2023. So that’s—even though that’s now six weeks old, I guess, that’s—that’s the most recent reading. Of course, we’ll update that reading at the—at the September meeting in eight weeks. So that’s how we’re thinking about it. As I mentioned, as it relates to September, I said that another unusually large increase could be appropriate, but that’s not a decision we’re making now. It’s one that we’ll make based on the data we see. And we’re going to be making decisions meeting by meeting. We think it’s—we think it’s time to just go to a meeting by meeting basis and not provide, you know, the kind of clear guidance that we had provided on the way to neutral. . So I’m going to start by pointing out that it’s very hard to say with any confidence in normal times—in normal times—what the economy’s going to be doing in 6 or 12 months. And to try to predict what the appropriate monetary policy would respond— response would be—of course, we do that in the SEP, but, nonetheless, you’ve got to take any estimates of what rates will be next year with a grain of salt, because there’s so much uncertainty. These are not normal times. There’s significantly more uncertainty now about the path ahead than I think there ordinarily is, and, ordinarily, it’s quite high. So, again, I would—the best data, the only data point I have for you really is the June SEP, which I think is just the most recent thing that the Committee’s done. Since then, inflation has come in higher  economic activity has come in weaker than expected. But at the same time, I would say that’s probably the best estimate of where the Committee’s thinking is still, which is that we would get to a moderately restrictive level by the end of this year—by which I mean somewhere between 3 and 3½ percent—and that when the Committee sees further rate increases in 2023, as I mentioned, we’ll update that, of course, at the September meeting. But that’s really the best I can do on that. . So I wouldn’t say it was—I think we didn’t expect a good reading, but this one—this one was even worse than expected, I would say. I don’t talk about my own personal estimate of, of what the terminal rate would be. I do—I will write down that in—it’s going to evolve. Obviously, it has evolved over the course—I think, for all participants, it has evolved over the course of the year as we learn how persistent inflation’s going to be. And by the time of the September meeting, we will have seen two more CPI readings and two more labor market readings and a significant amount of readings about economic activity and perhaps geopolitical developments, who knows. It’ll be—it’ll be a lot. It’s an eight week intermeeting period, so I think we’ll see quite a lot of data. And we’ll make our decision at that meeting based on that data. . So it’s hard to deal with hypotheticals, but I just would say this. We, you know, we would look at both, and we would ask—we’d be asking ourselves, are we confident that inflation is on a path down to 2 percent? That’s really the question. And we’ll be making—you know, our policy stance will be set at a level, ultimately, at which we are confident that inflation is going to be moving down to 2 percent. So you would—it would depend on a lot of things. Of course, as I mentioned, core inflation is a better predictor of inflation going forward. Headline inflation tends to be volatile. So, in ordinary times, you, you look through volatile moves in commodities. The problem with the current situation is that, that if you have a sustained period of supply shocks, those can actually start to undermine or to work—to work on de anchoring inflation expectations. The public doesn’t distinguish between core and headline inflation in their thinking. So it’s something we have to take into consideration in our policymaking even though our tools don’t really work on, on some aspects of this, which are the supply side issues. . So, as I—as I mentioned, we think it’s necessary to have growth slow down. And growth is going to be slowing down this year for a couple of reasons, one of which is that you’re coming off of the very high growth of the reopening year of 2021. You’re also seeing tighter monetary policy. And you should see some slowing. We actually think we need a period of growth below potential in order to create some slack so that—so that the supply side can catch up. We also think that there will be, in all likelihood, some softening in labor market conditions. And those are things that we expect. And we think that they’re probably necessary if we were to have—to get inflation—if we were to be able to get inflation back down on a path to 2 percent and ultimately get there. . So we’re going to be—again, we’re going to be focused on getting inflation back down. And we—as I’ve said on other occasions, price stability is really the bedrock of the economy. And nothing works in the economy without price stability. We can’t have a strong labor market without price stability for an extended period of time. We all want to get back to the kind of labor market we had before the pandemic, where differences between, you know, racial and gender differences and that kind of thing were at historic minimums, where participation was high, where inflation was low. We want to get back to that, but that’s not happening. That’s not going to happen without, without restoring price stability. So that’s something we see as, as something that we simply must do. And we think that in the—we don’t see it as a tradeoff with, with the employment mandate. We see it as a way to facilitate the sustained achievement of the employment mandate in the longer term. . So we’re trying to do just the right amount, right? We’re not—we’re not trying to have a recession. And we don’t think we have to. We think that there’s a path for us to be able to bring inflation down while sustaining a strong labor market, as I mentioned, along with—in all likelihood—some, some softening in labor market conditions. So that is— that’s what we’re trying to achieve, and we continue to think that there’s a path to that. We know that the path has, has clearly narrowed, really based on events that are outside of our control. And it may narrow further. So, you know, I do think—as I said just now—that restoring price stability is just something that we have to do. There, there isn’t an option to fail to do that because that is the thing that enables you to have a strong labor market over time. Without restoring price stability, you won’t be able, over the medium and longer term, to actually have a strong—a sustained period of very strong labor market conditions. So, of course, we serve both sides of the dual mandate, but we actually see them as well aligned on this. . We’re trying not to make a mistake. Let me put it this way: We do see that there are two sided risks. There would be the risk of doing too much and, you know, imposing more of a downturn on the economy than, than was necessary, but the risk—the risk of doing too little and leaving the economy with this entrenched inflation, it only raises the cost. If you fail to deal with it in the near term, it only raises the cost of, of dealing with it later to the extent people start to see it as just part of their economic lives. They start to factor high inflation into their decisions—when that—on a sustained basis. When that starts to really happen, and we don’t think that’s happened yet, but when that starts to happen, it just gets that much harder. And the pain will be that much greater. So I really do think that it’s important that we—that we address this now and get it done. . So I don’t—I do not think the U.S. is currently in a recession. And the reason is, there are just too many areas of the economy that are—that are performing, you know, too well. And, of course, I would point to the labor market, in particular. As I mentioned, it’s true that growth is slowing for reasons that we understand. Really, the growth was extraordinarily high last year, 5½ percent. We would have expected growth to slow. There’s also more slowing going on now. But if you look at the labor market, you’ve got growth—I think, payroll jobs averaging 450,000 per month. That’s a remarkably strong level for, for this state of, of affairs. The unemployment rate at near a 50 year low at 3.6 percent. All of the wage measures that we track are running very strong. So this is a very strong labor market, and it’s just not consistent with— you know, 2.7 million people hired in the first half of the year. It doesn’t make sense that the economy would be in recession with, with this kind of thing happening. So I don’t think the U.S. economy’s in recession right now. . Ah, haven’t seen it, and, and we’ll just have to see what it says. I don’t—I mean, I would say, generally, the GDP numbers do have a tendency to be revised pretty significantly. It’s just—it’s just that it’s very hard—it’s very hard to cumulate [to an estimate of] U.S. GDP. It’s a large economy. And a lot of—a lot of work and judgment goes into that. But you tend to take first GDP reports, I think, with a—with a grain of salt. But, of course, it’s something we’ll be looking at. . So those are—those are the toughest rules in place, you know, at any comparable institution that I’m aware of. We think—you know, we’ve thought about this carefully, and we put them in place. And we’re building the infrastructure so that—so that, you know, the enforcement will be tight, that, actually, you won’t be able to make trades unless they’re precleared. And the amount of trades you make, they’ll have to be 45 days or more before any FOMC meeting. It’s just—I think we’ve really, you know, created a very strong and robust set of rules that will, you know, support public trust in the institution. And, again, we’re just now—the system is just now up and running. And I’m proud of what we did. . So I’m going to—I’m going to take that as a question about the next meeting and thereafter. So, as I mentioned, we’re going to be looking at all of those things: activity, labor market, inflation. And we’re going to be thinking about our policy stance and where does it really need to be. And I also mentioned that, as this process—now that we’re at neutral—as the process goes on, at some point, it will be appropriate to, to slow down. And we haven’t made a decision when that point is, but intuitively that makes sense, right? We’ve been front end loading these very large rate increases, and now we’re getting closer to where we need to be. So that’s how we’re thinking about it. And in terms of September, we’re going—we’re going to watch the data and the evolving outlook very carefully and factor in everything and make a decision in September about what to do. And I’m not really going to provide any specific guidance about what that might be. So, you know, but I mentioned that we might do another unusually large rate increase. But that’s not a decision that we’ve made at all. So we are—you know, we’re going to be guided by the data. And I think you can still think of the, the destination as broadly in line with the September—sorry, the June SEP, because it’s only six weeks old. And sometimes, sometimes SEPs can get old really quick. I think in this one—this one I would say is probably, probably the best guide we have as to where the Committee thinks it needs to get at the end of the year and then into next year. So I would point you to that. . So it’s an interesting, interesting situation. Of course, we’ve, we’ve long used PCE because we think it’s just better at capturing the inflation that people actually face in their lives. And I think that that view is pretty widely understood. That said, the public really reads about CPI. And the difference really is because the CPI has higher weights on things like food, gasoline, motor vehicles, and housing than the PCE index does. And so that accounts for a lot of the difference. However, over time, they tend to come together. You know, we—given the importance in the public eye of CPI, we are calling it out and noticing it and everything like that. But remember, we do target PCE. That is because we think it’s a better measure. They will come together eventually. The typical gap was really about 25 basis points for a very long time. And if it went—if it got to 40 basis points, that would be very noticeable. And now it’s—now it’s much larger than that because of the things I mentioned. So we’ll be watching both, but, again, the one that we think is the best measure always has been PCE, at least since I think we—some 20 plus years ago—moved to PCE. . Well, just talking about demand for a second: As I mentioned in my remarks, I think you pretty clearly do see a slowing now in demand in the second quarter— consumer spending, business fixed investment, housing, places like that. I think, you know, people widely looked at the first quarter numbers and thought they didn’t make sense and might have been misleading in terms of the overall direction of the economy—[that was] not, not true of the second quarter. But at the same time, you have this labor market. So there are plenty of experiences where GDP has been reported as weak and the labor market as strong. And the economy has gone right through that and been fine. So that—that’s happened many times. And it used to happen—if you remember, in the first quarter of every year, for several years in a row, GDP was negative, and the labor market was moving on just fine. And it turned out to just be measurement error. It was called residual seasonality. We don’t know the situation. The truth is, though, we, we think that demand is moderating. We do. How much is it moderating? We’re not sure. We’re going to have to watch the data carefully. There are—there is a great deal of money on people’s balance sheets that they can spend. The unemployment rate is very low. The labor market’s very hot. There are many, many job openings. Wages are high. So it’s the kind of thing where you think that the—that the economy should actually be, be doing pretty well in the second half of the year. But we’ll have to see. We don’t know that because you do see a marked slowing in the second quarter that does—that is fairly broad. So we’ll be watching that. We’ll be watching that. Of course, as I mentioned, we do want to see demand running below potential for a sustained period to create slack and, and give inflation a chance to come down. . So I think you’re already seeing—you’ve seen, in the labor market, what you’ve seen is a decline from very high levels of job creation last year and earlier this year to modestly slower job creation—still, still quite robust, as I mentioned. So you’re seeing that. You’re seeing some increase—some increase in initial claims from insurance, although that may actually have to do with seasonal adjustments. We’re not sure that that’s actually real. There’s some evidence that wages—if you look at average hourly earnings, they appear to be moderating, not so yet from the other wage measures. And we’ll be getting the employment compensation index measurement, I think, on Friday, I guess. And that’s a very important one because it adjusts for compensation—composition. So I’d say you—and also, anecdotally, you hear much—the sort of level of concern on the part of businesses that they simply can’t find workers is probably down a little bit from what it was, say, for example, late in the latter parts of last year. So there’s a feeling that the labor market is moving back into balance. If you look at—if you look at job openings or quits, you see them moving sideways or perhaps a little bit down. But it’s only the beginning of an adjustment. But I think most—also, if you look at—I mean, once you start citing these things, you can’t stop. If you look at the household survey, you see much lower job creation, and the household survey can be quite volatile, but it has no jobs created in the last three months. So that might be a signal that job creation’s actually a little bit slower than we’re seeing in the—in the establishment survey. So executive summary [is]: I would say there’s some evidence that labor demand may be slowing a bit—labor supply, not so much. We have been disappointed that labor force participation really hasn’t moved up since January. That may be related to yet another big wave of COVID. And there’s evidence that that’s the case. But—So we’re not seeing much in the way of labor supply. Nonetheless, I would say some, some progress on demand and supply getting back in alignment. . So I think we’re looking—we’re going to be looking at, at inflation as well. You know, as I mentioned, we need to see inflation coming down. We need to be confident that inflation is going to get back down to mandate consistent levels. That’s not something we can avoid doing. That really needs to happen. And, but we do think, though, that the labor market can adjust because of the huge overhang of job openings, of excess demand, really. There should be able to be an adjustment that would have lower than—perhaps lower than expected increases in unemployment—lower than would be expected in the ordinary course of events because the level—the ratio of, of vacancies to unemployed is just out of keeping with historical experience. And that suggests that this time could be different. . So as, as I mentioned, it doesn’t seem that the U.S. economy is in recession right now. And I think you do see weakening, some slowdown—let’s put it that way— in growth. And you see it across some of the categories that I mentioned. But there’s also just the very strong data coming out of the labor market, still. So, overall, you would say that, in all probability, demand is still strong, and, and the economy is still on track to continue to grow this year. But the slowdown in the second quarter is notable. And we’re—you know, we’re going to be watching that carefully. Sorry, what was the— . Well, you know, we’ve said since the beginning, I think, that, that having a soft landing is what we’re aiming for. Of course, that has to be our goal. It is our goal. And we’ll keep trying to achieve it. I think—I do think events—at the beginning, we said it was not going to be easy. It was going to be quite challenging to do that. It’s unusual. It’s an unusual event. It’s not a typical event, given where we are. If there is a path to it, and we think there is, it is the one I mentioned, that the labor market actually is—has such a large amount of surplus demand that you could see—you could see that demand coming down in a way that didn’t translate into a big increase in unemployment as you would expect in the ordinary course because, frankly, the imbalance is so much greater. And, but we don’t know that. I mean, this is a—this is a case of first impression. So anyone who is really sure that it’s impossible or really sure that it will happen is probably underestimating the level of uncertainty. And so I would certainly say it’s an uncertain, uncertain thing. Nonetheless, it’s our goal to achieve it, and we’ll keep trying to do that. . So we think it’s working fine. As you know, we, we tapered up into it. And, and in September, we’ll go to full strength. And the markets seem to have accepted it. By all assessments, the markets should be able to absorb this. And we expect that’ll be the case. So I would say the plan is broadly on track. It’s a little bit slow to get going because some of these trades don’t settle until—for a bit of time. But it’ll be picking up steam. So I guess your second question was getting—the process of getting back down to the new equilibrium will take a while. And that time, it’s hard to be precise, but, you know, the model would suggest that it could be between two, two and a half years, that kind of thing. And this is a much faster pace than the last time. Balance sheet’s much, much bigger than it was. But we looked at this carefully, and we thought that this, this was the sensible pace. And we have no reason to think it’s not. . So a big piece of that is inflation expectations—you know, breakevens coming down, which, you know, is a good thing. It’s a good thing that markets do seem to have confidence in, in the Committee’s commitment to getting inflation back down to 2 percent. So we like to see market based, you know, readings of inflation expectations come down. You know, broader financial conditions have tightened, tightened a good bit. I mean, the way this works is we, we set our policy, and financial conditions react, and then financial conditions are what affects the economy. And we don’t control that second step. We’re just going to do what we think needs to be done. We’re going to—we’re going to get our policy rate to a level where we’re confident that inflation will be moving back down to 2 percent. Confident. So that’s how we’re going to take it. And, of course, we’ll be watching financial conditions to see that they are appropriately tight and that they’re having the effect that we would hope they’re having, which is to see demand moderate and inflationary pressures recede and, ultimately, inflation come down. . So, yes, we said that we wouldn’t lift off until we had basically achieved our dual mandate goals. And the reason we did it in real time was that, the first look at the new framework that we’d rolled out, plenty of people were saying, “It’s not credible. You’ll never get inflation to 2 percent.” Some of our critics now who say inflation’s too tight—too high were the same ones who were saying, “You’ll never get to 2 percent.” Well, but anyway, that’s what happened. So we, we thought we needed to really make a strong statement with that. It wasn’t part of the framework. The December ’20 guidance was not part of our overall new framework. It was just guidance that we put in place. So I would say two things. One, I don’t think that that has materially changed the situation. But I have to admit, I don’t think I would do that again. I don’t think I would do that again. We—you know, ultimately, the situation evolved in a highly unexpected way for all of us. And, you know, maybe the learning is that leave a little more flexibility than that. But did it matter in the end? You know, we—if you look at—I really don’t think it did. I’m not sure it would’ve mattered if we’d been raising rates three months earlier. Does anybody think that would’ve made a big difference? I mean, lots of central banks were raising rates three months earlier, and it didn’t matter. I mean, this is a—this is a global phenomenon that’s happening now—admittedly, different in the United States, but anyway. . So I think we learned—there’ve been multiple taper tantrums, right? So there was the famous one in 2013. There’s what happened at the December ’18 meeting, where, you know, markets can ignore developments around the balance sheet for years on end and then suddenly react very sharply. So we just had developed a practice of moving predictably and doing it in steps and things like that. It was just like that’s how we did it. And so we did it that way this time. We were—we were careful to, to take steps and communicate and all that kind of thing. Yes, we were trying to avoid a tantrum because they can be quite destructive. They can tighten financial conditions and knock the economy off kilter. And, you know, when it happens, you have to—really, in both ’13 and ’18, it really had consequences for the real economy, you know, two, three, four months later. So we were trying to avoid that. That was part of it. Again, I don’t think that’s—the real issue of 2020 and ’21 was just trying to understand what was happening with the reopening economy. That, that was where the big uncertainty was. And, you know, our view was that these supply side issues would get better: that people would go back to work, that labor force participation would come back, everyone would get vaccinated, schools would open, kids would be in school, and labor force participation would jump back up. That’s what we were—that was very broadly thought to be the case: these supply side issues would get solved reasonably quickly. And they just haven’t. They still haven’t. So that’s really the learning, I think, is around how complicated these supply side issues can be. We haven’t seen this before in a long, long time. And so that’s really, you know, what accounts for the pace at which we moved, and we did. When inflation changed direction, really, in October, we’ve moved quickly since then. I think people would agree. But before then, inflation was coming down month by month. And, you know, we kind of thought we had the story—probably had the story right. But then, I think in October, you started to see a range of data that said “No. This is a much stronger economy and much higher inflation than we’ve been thinking.” And, again, we’ve pivoted, and here we are. . So the Fed doesn’t make a—doesn’t make a judgment on that. You know, we’re focused on the dual mandate and using our tools to achieve maximum employment and price stability. We don’t—we don’t say “There is now a recession” and that kind of thing. So that wouldn’t be something we’d do. We would look at the data tomorrow—and no doubt, we’ll look at it very carefully—and draw whatever implications we can. As I mentioned, though, you know, if you think about what an inflation—sorry, what a recession really is, it’s a broad based decline across many industries that, you know, is sustained for more than a couple of months, and there are a bunch of specific tests in it. And it just doesn’t—this just doesn’t seem like that now. What we have right now doesn’t seem like that. And the real reason is that the labor market is just sending such a signal of economic strength that it makes you really question the GDP data. But, again, that’s not a decision that we—that we make. And we won’t—we won’t reach a conclusion one way or another on that. . So I think, broadly, a lot of economists think that the—that the natural rate of unemployment will have moved up to some significant extent above where we think it was before. And the reason is there’s—it’s the usual matching issue, where matching has become less effective, and that kind of thing when you have the kind of turbulent downturn and the big switches in demand from services to goods and all that. So it could be higher. And my own instinct is that the natural rate of unemployment is higher. Of course, I would add that we don’t know it. We can never know where these star variables are in real time with any confidence. But I would say it must have moved up materially. But the other side of that is, as all these jobs get created and people go back to work and unemployment is so low, I think you could, in principle, you could see it coming back down pretty significantly. And that would also, by the way, take pressure off of inflation because it’s that gap—it’s the gap between actual unemployment and the—and the natural rate that really is relevant for, you know, the negative slack we have in the economy with the overtight labor market. So if you were to—you wouldn’t observe this. It’s an unobservable, but you could actually be seeing inflationary pressures coming down if that does happen. And we don’t—we don’t control that. But that’s something that, logically, if the pandemic and the disorder in the labor market caused the natural rate to move up, then as the labor market settles down, in principle, you should see it move back down. . No, all I’ve really said is I don’t think it’s likely that the U.S. economy’s in a recession now. And I’ve explained why that is the case. It’s, it’s because you do see a very strong labor market. And I think the public will see that as well. You know, going forward, what we’ve seen is a—is a slowing in spending, as I mentioned. We’ve seen the very beginnings of perhaps a slight lessening in the—in the tightness of the labor market, but it would only be the beginnings. So, and I mentioned that, that—I also said that our goal is to bring inflation down and have a so called soft landing, by which I mean a landing that doesn’t require a significant increase, a really significant increase in unemployment. We’re trying to achieve that. I have said, on many occasions, that we understand that’s going to be quite challenging and that it’s got more challenging over recent months. . I mean, there are precedents for the FOMC moving very quickly— for example, in 1994, and in 1980, even more so. So we’ve been known to do that when it’s the appropriate thing to do. And this year, it clearly is. I would say that, given how quickly we’ve moved, I’m gratified that while—that, basically, markets have been working. They’ve been orderly. There’s been some volatility, but that’s only to be expected. For a financial stability perspective, you know, asset values are down, which in some—in some sense lowers vulnerabilities. It’s when they’re really high that you would worry that they’re—that they’re vulnerable to a fall, actually. Many asset values have come down. I think you’ve got a well capitalized banking system. I think you have—households are generally in about as strong as financial shape as they’ve been in a very long time or perhaps ever given the money that’s on people’s balance sheets. So you have a pretty—from a financial stability standpoint, you have a pretty decent picture. Now, the macroeconomic, there are plenty of macroeconomic issues that don’t rise to the level of financial stability concerns. By financial stability, you know, we think of that as things that might undermine the working of the financial system, so big, serious things. That’s not to say that people at the lower end of the income spectrum aren’t, aren’t suffering, because they are. They’re suffering from high inflation. They’re going to the—to the grocery store and finding that, in many cases, their paycheck doesn’t cover the food they’re accustomed to buying. We’re seeing actual, you know, real declines in food consumption. And, you know, it’s very concerning. It’s very unfortunate. And that’s why we’re—we’re really committed to bringing down inflation—one of the reasons. . So I guess the first thing I would say to, to every household is that we know that inflation is too high. We understand how painful it is, particularly for people who are living paycheck to paycheck and spend most of that paycheck on necessities, such as food and gas and heating their homes and clothing and things like that. We do understand that, that those people suffer the most. Middle class and better off people have some resources, where they can absorb these things. But people, many people, don’t have those resources. So, you know, we—it is our job. It is our institutional role. We are assigned uniquely and unconditionally the obligation of, of providing price stability to the American people. And we’re going to use our tools to do that. As I mentioned, there will be some, in all likelihood, some softening in labor market conditions. We need growth to slow to below potential growth. We don’t want to—we don’t want this to be bigger than it needs to be. But, ultimately, if you think about the medium and longer term, price stability is the thing that, that makes the whole economy work. It’s what can—it can give us a strong labor market and wages that aren’t being eaten up by high inflation. If you talk to people—again, people who are making, you know, wages, relatively low wages— they’re the ones who are suffering the most from inflation. So it’s all the more reason why we need to move, move on this. Thank you very much.

****FOMCpresconf20220921

. Good afternoon. My colleagues and I are strongly committed to bringing inflation back down to our 2 percent goal. We have both the tools we need and the resolve that it will take to restore price stability on behalf of American families and businesses. Price stability is the responsibility of the Federal Reserve and serves as the bedrock of our economy. Without price stability, the economy does not work for anyone. In particular, without price stability, we will not achieve a sustained period of strong labor market conditions that benefit all. Today the FOMC raised its policy interest rate by ¾ percentage point, and we anticipate that ongoing increases will be appropriate. We are moving our policy stance purposefully to a level that will be sufficiently restrictive to return inflation to 2 percent. In addition, we are continuing the process of significantly reducing the size of our balance sheet. I will have more to say about today’s monetary policy actions after briefly reviewing economic developments. The U.S. economy has slowed from the historically high growth rates of 2021, which reflected the reopening of the economy following the pandemic recession. Recent indicators point to modest growth of spending and production. Growth in consumer spending has slowed from last year’s rapid pace, in part reflecting lower real disposable income and tighter financial conditions. Activity in the housing sector has weakened significantly, in large part reflecting higher mortgage rates. Higher interest rates and slower output growth also appear to be weighing on business fixed investment, while weaker economic growth abroad is restraining exports. As shown in our Summary of Economic Projections, since June, FOMC participants have marked down their projections for economic activity, with the median projection for real GDP growth standing at just 0.2 percent this year and 1.2 percent next year, well below the median estimate of the longer run normal growth rate. Despite the slowdown in growth, the labor market has remained extremely tight, with the unemployment rate near a 50 year low, job vacancies near historical highs, and wage growth elevated. Job gains have been robust, with employment rising by an average of 378,000 jobs per month over the last three months. The labor market continues to be out of balance, with demand for workers substantially exceeding the supply of available workers. The labor force participation rate showed a welcome uptick in August but is little changed since the beginning of the year. FOMC participants expect supply and demand conditions in the labor market to come into better balance over time, easing the upward pressure on wages and prices. The median projection in the SEP for the unemployment rate rises to 4.4 percent at the end of next year, ½ percentage point higher than in the June projections. Over the next three years, the median unemployment rate runs above the median estimate of its longer run normal level. Inflation remains well above our 2 percent longer run goal. Over the 12 months ending in July, total PCE prices rose 6.3 percent  excluding the volatile food and energy categories, core PCE prices rose 4.6 percent. In August, the 12 month change in the consumer price index was 8.3 percent, and the change in the core CPI was 6.3 percent. Price pressures remain evident across a broad range of goods and services. Although gasoline prices have turned down in recent months, they remain well above year earlier levels, in part reflecting Russia’s war against Ukraine, which has boosted prices for energy and food and has created additional upward pressure on inflation. The median projection in the SEP for total PCE inflation is 5.4 percent this year and falls to 2.8 percent next year, 2.3 percent in 2024, and 2 percent in 2025. Participants continue to see risks to inflation as weighted to the upside. Despite elevated inflation, longer term inflation expectations appear to remain well anchored, as reflected in a broad range of surveys of households, businesses, and forecasters as well as measures from financial markets. But that is not grounds for complacency  the longer the current bout of high inflation continues, the greater the chance that expectations of higher inflation will become entrenched. The Fed’s monetary policy actions are guided by our mandate to promote maximum employment and stable prices for the American people. My colleagues and I are acutely aware that high inflation imposes significant hardship, as it erodes purchasing power, especially for those least able to meet the higher costs of essentials like food, housing, and transportation. We are highly attentive to the risks that high inflation poses to both sides of our mandate, and we are strongly committed to returning inflation to our 2 percent objective. At today’s meeting, the Committee raised the target range for the federal funds rate by ¾ percentage point, bringing the target range to 3 to 3¼ percent. And we are continuing the process of significantly reducing the size of our balance sheet, which plays an important role in firming the stance of monetary policy. Over coming months, we will be looking for compelling evidence that inflation is moving down consistent with inflation returning to 2 percent. We anticipate that ongoing increases in the target range for the federal funds rate will be appropriate  the pace of those increases will continue to depend on the incoming data and the evolving outlook for the economy. With today’s action, we have raised interest rates by 3 percentage points this year. At some point, as the stance of monetary policy tightens further, it will become appropriate to slow the pace of increases while we assess how our cumulative policy adjustments are affecting the economy and inflation. We will continue to make our decisions meeting by meeting and communicate our thinking as clearly as possible. Restoring price stability will likely require maintaining a restrictive policy stance for some time. The historical record cautions strongly against prematurely loosening policy. As shown in the SEP, the median projection for the appropriate level of the federal funds rate is 4.4 percent at the end of this year, 1 percentage point higher than projected in June. The median projection rises to 4.6 percent at the end of next year and declines to 2.9 percent by the end of 2025, still above the median estimate of its longer run value. Of course, these projections do not represent a Committee decision or plan, and no one knows with any certainty where the economy will be a year or more from now. We are taking forceful and rapid steps to moderate demand so that it comes into better alignment with supply. Our overarching focus is using our tools to bring inflation back down to our 2 percent goal and to keep longer term inflation expectations well anchored. Reducing inflation is likely to require a sustained period of below trend growth, and there will very likely be some softening of labor market conditions. Restoring price stability is essential to set the stage for achieving maximum employment and stable prices over the longer run. We will keep at it until we are confident the job is done. To conclude: We understand that our actions affect communities, families, and businesses across the country. Everything we do is in service to our public mission. We at the Fed will do everything we can to achieve our maximum employment and price stability goals. Thank you, and I look forward to your questions. . So I will answer—I will answer your question directly, but I want to start here today by saying that my main message has not changed at all since Jackson Hole. The FOMC is strongly resolved to bring inflation down to 2 percent, and we will keep at it until the job is done. So the way we’re thinking about this is, the overarching focus of the Committee is getting inflation back down to 2 percent. To accomplish that, we think we’ll need to do two things, in particular: to achieve a period of growth below trend  and also some softening in labor market conditions to foster a better balance between demand and supply in the labor market. So on the first, the Committee’s forecasts and those of most outside forecasters do show growth running below its longer run potential this year and next year. On the second, though, so far there’s only modest evidence that the labor market is cooling off. Job openings are down a bit, as you know  quits are off their all time highs  there’s some signs that some wage measures may be flattening out but not moving up  payroll gains have moderated but not much. And in light of the high inflation we’re seeing, we think we’ll need to—and in light of what I just said, we think that we’ll need to bring our funds rate to a restrictive level and to keep it there for some time. So, what will we be looking at, I guess, is your question. So we’ll be looking at a few things. First, we’ll want to see growth continuing to run below trend, we’ll want to see movements in the labor market showing a return to a better balance between supply and demand, and, ultimately, we’ll want to see clear evidence that inflation is moving back down to 2 percent. So that’s what we’ll be looking for. In terms of reducing rates, I think we’d want to be very confident that inflation is moving back down to 2 percent before we would consider that. . Sure. So, of course, monetary policy does, famously, work with long and variable lags. The way I think of it is, our policy decisions affect financial conditions immediately. In fact, financial conditions have usually been affected well before we actually announce our decisions. Then, changes in financial conditions begin to affect economic activity fairly quickly, within a few months. But it’s likely to take some time to see the full effects of changing financial conditions on inflation. So we are very much mindful for that. And that’s why I noted in my opening remarks that, at some point, as the stance of policy tightens further, it will become appropriate to slow the pace of rate hikes while we assess how our cumulative policy adjustments are affecting the economy and inflation. So that’s how we think about that. Your second question—sorry—was? . I should know better than to answer your second question. [Laughter] . So I think it’s very hard to say with precise certainty the way this is going to unfold. As I mentioned, what we think we need to do and should do is to move our policy rate to a restrictive level that’s restrictive enough to bring inflation down to 2 percent, where we have confidence of that. And what you see in the SEP numbers is people’s views as of today, as of this meeting, as to the kind of levels that will be appropriate. Now, those will evolve over time, and I think we’ll just have to see how that goes. There is a possibility, certainly, that we would go to a certain level that we’re confident in and stay there for a time. But we’re not at that level. Clearly, today we’re, we’ve just moved, I think, probably, into the very lowest level of what might be restrictive, and, certainly, in my view and the view of the Committee, there’s a ways to go. . Right. So you’re right—in the SEP, there’s what I would characterize as a relatively modest increase in the unemployment rate from a historical perspective, given the expected decline in inflation. Now, why is that? So, really, that is what we generally expect because we see the current situation as outside of historical experience in a number of ways, and I’ll mention a couple of those. First—and you know these—but first, job openings are incredibly high relative to the number of people looking for work. It’s plausible, I’ll say, that job openings could come down significantly—and they need to—without as much of an increase in unemployment as has happened in earlier historical episodes. So that’s one thing. In addition, in this cycle, longer run inflation expectations have generally been fairly well anchored, and, as I’ve said, there’s no basis for complacency there. But to the extent that continues to be the case, that should make it easier to restore price stability. And I guess the third thing I would point to that’s different this time is that part of this inflation is caused by this series of supply shocks that we’ve had, beginning with the pandemic, and, really, with the reopening of the economy, and more recently amplified and added to by Russia’s invasion of Ukraine—have all contributed to the sharp increase in inflation. So these are the kinds of events that are not really seen in prior business cycles, and, in principle, if those things start to get better—and we do see some evidence of the beginnings of that. It’s not much more than that, but it’s good to see that. For example, commodity prices look like they may have peaked for now  supply chain disruptions are beginning to resolve. Those developments, if sustained, could help ease the pressures on inflation. So let me just say, how much these factors will turn out to really matter in this sequence of events—it remains to be seen. We have always understood that restoring price stability while achieving a relatively modest decline—or, rather, increase—in unemployment and a soft landing would be very challenging. And we don’t know—no one knows whether this process will lead to a recession or, if so, how significant that recession would be. That’s going to depend on how quickly wage and price inflation pressures come down, whether expectations remain anchored, and whether, also, do we get more labor supply, which would help as well. In addition, the chances of a soft landing are likely to diminish to the extent that policy needs to be more restrictive or restrictive for longer. Nonetheless, we’re committed to getting inflation back down to 2 percent—because we think that a failure to restore price stability would mean far greater pain later on. . Yes, vacancies are still almost a 2 to 1 ratio to unemployed people. That and quits are really very good ways to look at how tight the labor market is and how different it is from other cycles, where, generally, the unemployment rate itself is the single best indicator. We think those things have, for quite a time now, really added value in terms of understanding where the labor market is. . Well, so, again, we believe that we need to raise our policy stance overall to a level that is restrictive—and by that I mean, is meaningfully, putting meaningful downward pressure on inflation. That’s what we need to see in the stance of policy. We also know that there are long and variable lags, particularly as they relate to inflation. So it’s a challenging assessment. So, what do you look at? You look at broader financial conditions, as you know  you look at where rates are, real and nominal in some cases  you look at credit spreads  you look at financial conditions indexes. We also, I would think—and you see this in the—this is something we talked about today in the meeting and talk about in all of our meetings. And you see this, I think, in the Committee forecast. You want to be at a place where real rates are positive across the entire yield curve. And I think that would be the case if you look at the numbers that we’re writing down and think about—you measure those against some sort of forward looking assessment of inflation, inflation expectations. I think you would see at that time—you’d see positive real rates across the yield curve, and that is also an important consideration. . So we make one decision per meeting, and the decision we made today was to raise the federal funds rate by 75 [basis points]. You’re right that the median for the year end suggests another 125 basis points in rate increases, but there’s also, there’s another fairly large group that saw a 100 basis points addition to where we are today. So that would be 25 basis points less. So we’re going to make that decision at the meeting. We didn’t make that decision today  we didn’t vote on that. I would say that we’re committed to getting to a restrictive level for the federal funds rate and getting there pretty quickly, and that’s what we’re thinking about. . So, what we’ve seen is, inflation has—our expectation has been that we would begin to see inflation come down, largely because of supply side healing. By now we would have thought that we’d have seen some of that. We haven’t. We have seen some supply  side healing, but inflation has not really come down. If you look at core PCE inflation, which is a good measure of where inflation is running now, if you look at it on a 3 , 6 , and 12 month trailing annualized basis, you’ll see that inflation is at 4.8 percent, 4.5 percent, and 4.8 percent. So that’s a pretty good summary of where we are with inflation. And that’s not where we expected or wanted to be. So, what that tells us is that we need to continue, and we can—keep doing these, and we did today—do another large increase as we approach the level that we think we need to get to. And we’re still discovering what that level is. But people are writing that down in their SEP where they think policy needs to be. So that’s how we’re thinking about it. . So I guess core is at 2.1 in 2025—in the median—and headline is at 2.0, so that’s pretty close. I mean, we write down our forecasts, and we figure out what the median is, and we publish it. So it’s not—I mean, I would say that if, actually, if the economy followed this path, this would be a pretty good outcome. But you’re right—it is a tenth higher than 2 percent. . Yeah. So we, as we said at the last press conference and in between that one and this one, we said that we would make our decision based on the overall data coming in. So, if you remember, we got a surprisingly low reading in July and then a surprisingly high reading for August. So I think you have to—you can’t really—you never want to overreact too much to any one data point. So if you look at them together—and, as I just mentioned, if you really look at this year’s inflation, 3 , 6 , and 12 month trailing, you see inflation is running too high. It’s running 4.5 percent or above  you don’t need to know much more than that. If that’s the one thing you know, you know that this Committee is committed to getting to a meaningfully restrictive stance of policy and staying there until we feel confident that inflation is coming down. That’s how we think about it. . So we, what we said, as you know, was that we would consider that once balance sheet runoff is well under way. I would say it’s not something we’re considering right now and not something I expect to be considering in the near term. It’s just, it’s something I think we will turn to, but that time, the time for turning to it, has not come and is not close. . I think a number of things might affect that decision, really. The main thing is, we’re not considering that decision, and I don’t expect that we will any time soon. . So we, actually, my colleagues and I, a number of my FOMC colleagues and I, just got back from one of our frequent trips to Basel, Switzerland, to meet with other senior central bank officials from around the world. We are in pretty regular contact, and we exchange, of course—we all serve a domestic mandate, domestic objectives—in our case, the dual mandate, maximum employment and price stability. But we regularly discuss what we’re seeing in terms of our own economy and international spillovers, and it’s a very ongoing, constant kind of a process. So we are very aware of what’s going on in other economies around the world and what that means for us, and vice versa. The forecasts that we put together, that our staff puts together, and that we put together on our own always take all of that—try to take all of that into account. I mean, I can’t say that we do it perfectly, but it’s not as if we don’t think about the policy decisions—monetary policy and otherwise—the economic developments that are taking place in major economies that can have an effect on the U.S. economy. That is very much baked into our own forecast and our own understanding of the U.S. economy, as best we can. It won’t be perfect. So I don’t see—it’s hard to talk about collaboration in a world where people have very different levels of interest rates. If you remember, there were coordinated cuts and raises and things like that at various times, but, really, we’re all, we’re in very different situations. But I will tell you, our contact is more or less ongoing, and it’s not coordination, but there’s a lot of information sharing. And we all, I think, are informed by what other important economies— economies that are important to the United States—are doing. . You’re right, of course—the labor market, in particular, has been very strong. But there are—the sectors of the economy that are most interest rate sensitive are certainly showing the effects of our tightening, and, of course, the obvious example is housing, where you see declining activity of all different kinds and house price increases moving down. So we’re having an effect on interest sensitive spending. I think, through exchange rates, we’re having an effect on exports and imports. I think—so all of that’s happening, but you’re right, and we’ve said this: This is a strong, robust economy. People have savings on their balance sheet from the period when they couldn’t spend and where they were getting government transfers. There’s still very significant savings out there, although not as much at the lower end of the income spectrum—but still, some savings out there to support growth. The states are very flush with cash, so there’s good reason to think that this will continue to be a reasonably strong economy. Now, the data sort of are showing that growth is going to be below trend this year. We think of trend as being about 1.8 percent, or in that range. We’re forecasting growth well below that, and most forecasters are. But you’re right—there’s certainly a possibility that growth can be stronger than that. And that’s a good thing, because that means the economy will be more resistant to a significant downturn. But, of course, we are focused on the thing I started with, which is getting inflation back down to 2 percent. We can’t fail to do that. I mean, if we were to fail to do that, that would be the thing that would be most painful for the people that we serve. So for now, that has to be our overarching focus, and you see that, I think, in the SEP, in the levels of rates that we’ll be moving to reasonably quickly, assuming things turn out roughly in line with the SEP. So that’s how we think about it. . So I don’t know what the odds are. I think that there’s a very high likelihood that we’ll have a period of what I’ve mentioned is below trend growth, by which I mean much lower growth, and we’re seeing that now. So the median forecast, I think, this year among my colleagues and me was 0.2 percent growth. So that’s very slow growth. And then below trend next year. I think the median was 1.2, also well below. So that’s a slower, that’s a very slow level of growth, and it could give rise to increases in unemployment. But I think that’s, so that is something that we think we need to have, and we think we need to have softer labor market conditions as well. We’re never going to say that there are too many people working, but the real point is this: Inflation—what we hear from people when we meet with them is that they really are suffering from inflation. And if we want to set ourselves up, really light the way to another period of a very strong labor market, we have got to get inflation behind us. I wish there were a painless way to do that. There isn’t. So, what we need to do is get rates up to the point where we’re putting meaningful downward pressure on inflation, and that’s what we’re doing. And we certainly don’t hope, we certainly haven’t given up the idea that we can have a relatively modest increase in unemployment. Nonetheless, we need to complete this task. . It’s hard to hypothetically deal with that question. I mean, again, our really tight focus now continues to be ongoing rate increases to get the policy rate up where it needs to be. And, as I said, you can look at this SEP as today’s estimate of where we think those rates would be. Of course, they will evolve over time. . So, for starters, people are seeing their wage increases eaten up by inflation. So if your family is one where you spend most of your paycheck, every paycheck cycle, on gas, food, transportation, clothing, basics of life, and prices go up the way they’ve been going up, you’re in trouble right away. You don’t have a cushion, and this is very painful for people at the lower end of the income and wealth spectrum. So that’s what we’re hearing from people is, you know, very much—that inflation is really hurting. So how do we get rid of inflation? And, as I mentioned, it would be nice if there were a way to just wish it away, but there isn’t. We have to get supply and demand back into alignment, and the way we do that is by slowing the economy. Hopefully, we do that by slowing the economy, and we see some softening in labor market conditions, and we see a big contribution from supply side improvements, and things like that. But none of that is guaranteed. In any case, we, our job is to deliver price stability, and I think—you can think of price stability as an asset that just delivers large benefits to society over a long period of time. We really saw that for a long time. The United States had 2 percent inflation, didn’t move around much, and that was enormously beneficial to the public that we serve. And we have to get back to that and keep it for another long period of time. To pull back from the task of doing that is, you’re just postponing—the record shows that if you postpone that, the delay is only likely to lead to more pain. So I think we’re moving to do what we need to do and do our jobs, and that’s what you see us doing. . How long? I mean, it really depends on how long it takes for wages and, more than that, prices to come down for inflation to come down. And so what you see in our projections today is that inflation moves down significantly over the course of next year and then more the next year after that. And I think once you’re on that path, that’s a good thing. And things will start to feel better to people—they’ll feel lower inflation, they’ll feel that the economy is improving. And also, if our projections are close to right, you’ll see that the costs in unemployment are, they’re meaningful, and they’re certainly very meaningful to the people who lose their jobs. And we talk about that in our meetings quite a lot. But, at the same time, we’d be setting the economy up for another long period—this era has been noted for very long expansions. We’ve had three of the four longest in measured history since we got inflation under control. And that’s not an accident. So when inflation is low and stable, you can have these 9, 10, 11—10 year, anyway, expansions, and you can see what we saw in 2018, ’19, and ’20, which was very low unemployment, the biggest wage gains going to people at the low end of the spectrum, the smallest racial gaps that we’ve seen since we started keeping track of that. So we want to get back to that. But, to get there, we’re going to have to get supply and demand back in alignment, and that’s going to take tight monetary policy for a period of time. . So it’s all of those things. Higher interest rates, slower growth, and a softening labor market are all painful for the public that we serve. But they’re not as painful as failing to restore price stability and then having to come back and do it down the road again and doing it at a time when, actually, now people have really come to expect high inflation. If the concept of high inflation becomes entrenched in people’s economic thinking about their decisions, then sort of getting back to price stability—the cost of getting back to price stability just rises, and so we want to avoid that. We want to act aggressively now and get this job done and keep at it until it’s done. . So when I say “reset,” I’m not looking at a particular, specific set of data or anything. What I’m really saying is that we’ve had a time of a red hot housing market all over the country, where, famously, houses were selling to the first buyer at 10 percent above the ask, before even seeing the house. That kind of thing. So there was a big imbalance between supply and demand. Housing prices were going up at an unsustainably fast level. So the deceleration in housing prices that we’re seeing should help bring sort of prices more closely in line with rents and other housing market fundamentals, and that’s a good thing. For the longer term, what we need is supply and demand to get better aligned so that housing prices go up at a reasonable level—at a reasonable pace—and that people can afford houses again. And I think we—so we probably, in the housing market, have to go through a correction to get back to that place. There’s also, there are also longer run issues, though, with the housing market. As you know, we’re—it’s difficult to find lots now close enough to cities and things like that, so builders are having a hard time getting zoning and lots and workers and materials and things like that. But from a sort of business cycle standpoint, this difficult correction should put the housing market back into better balance. . I think that shelter inflation is going to remain high for some time. We’re looking for it to come down, but it’s not exactly clear when that will happen. So it may take some time, so I think, hope for the best, plan for the worst. So I think, on shelter inflation, you’ve just got to assume that it’s going to remain pretty high for a while. . So I think if you look, when we get to—if we—let’s assume we do get to that level, which I think is likely. What you’re going to do is, you’re going to adjust that for some forward looking measure of inflation. And that could be—you pick your measure. It could be—there are all kinds of different things you could pick and you get—but what you’ll get is a positive number. In all cases, you will get forward inflation expectations in the short term, I think, that are going to be, assuming that we’re doing our jobs appropriately, that will be significant. So you’ll have a positive [real] federal funds rate at that point, which could be 1 percent or so, but—I mean, I don’t know exactly what it would be. But it would be significantly positive when we get to that level. And let me say, we’ve written down what we think is a plausible path for the federal funds rate. The path that we actually execute will be enough. It will be enough to restore price stability. So this is something that, as you can see, they’ve moved up, and we’re going to continue to watch incoming data and the evolving outlook and ask ourselves whether our policy is in the right place as we go. Thank you very much.

****FOMCpresconf20221102

. Good afternoon. My colleagues and I are strongly committed to bringing inflation back down to our 2 percent goal. We have both the tools that we need and the resolve it will take to restore price stability on behalf of American families and businesses. Price stability is the responsibility of the Federal Reserve and serves as the bedrock of our economy. Without price stability, the economy does not work for anyone. In particular, without price stability, we will not achieve a sustained period of strong labor market conditions that benefit all. Today, the FOMC raised our policy interest rate by 75 basis points. And we continue to anticipate that ongoing increases will be appropriate. We are moving our policy stance purposefully to a level that will be sufficiently restrictive to return inflation to 2 percent. In addition, we are continuing the process of significantly reducing the size of our balance sheet. Restoring price stability will likely require maintaining a restrictive stance of policy for some time. I will have more to say about today’s monetary policy actions after briefly reviewing economic developments. The U.S. economy has slowed significantly from last year’s rapid pace. Real GDP rose at a pace of 2.6 percent last quarter but is unchanged so far this year. Recent indicators point to modest growth of spending and production this quarter. Growth in consumer spending has slowed from last year’s rapid pace, in part reflecting lower real disposable income and tighter financial conditions. Activity in the housing sector has weakened significantly, largely reflecting higher mortgage rates. Higher interest rates and slower output growth also appear to be weighing on business fixed investment. Despite the slowdown in growth, the labor market remains extremely tight, with the unemployment rate at a 50 year low, job vacancies still very high, and wage growth elevated. Job gains have been robust, with employment rising by an average of 289,000 jobs per month over August and September. Although job vacancies have moved below their highs and the pace of job gains has slowed from earlier in the year, the labor market continues to be out of balance, with demand substantially exceeding the supply of available workers. The labor force participation rate is little changed since the beginning of the year. Inflation remains well above our longer run goal of 2 percent. Over the 12 months ending in September, total PCE prices rose 6.2 percent  excluding the volatile food and energy categories, core PCE prices rose 5.1 percent. And the recent inflation data again have come in higher than expected. Price pressures remain evident across a broad range of goods and services. Russia’s war against Ukraine has boosted prices for energy and food and has created additional upward pressure on inflation. Despite elevated inflation, longer term inflation expectations appear to remain well anchored, as reflected in a broad range of surveys of households, businesses, and forecasters, as well as measures from financial markets. But that is not grounds for complacency  the longer the current bout of high inflation continues, the greater the chance that expectations of higher inflation will become entrenched. The Fed’s monetary policy actions are guided by our mandate to promote maximum employment and stable prices for the American people. My colleagues and I are acutely aware that high inflation imposes significant hardship as it erodes purchasing power, especially for those least able to meet the higher costs of essentials like food, housing, and transportation. We are highly attentive to the risks that high inflation poses to both sides of our mandate, and we are strongly committed to returning inflation to our 2 percent objective. At today’s meeting, the Committee raised the target range for the federal funds rate by 75 basis points. And we are continuing the process of significantly reducing the size of our balance sheet, which plays an important role in firming the stance of monetary policy. With today’s action, we have raised interest rates by 3¾ percentage points this year. We anticipate that ongoing increases in the target range for the federal funds rate will be appropriate in order to attain a stance of monetary policy that is sufficiently restrictive to return inflation to 2 percent over time. Financial conditions have tightened significantly in response to our policy actions, and we are seeing the effects on demand in the most interest rate sensitive sectors of the economy, such as housing. It will take time, however, for the full effects of monetary restraint to be realized, especially on inflation. That’s why we say in our statement that in determining the pace of future increases in the target range, we will take into account the cumulative tightening of monetary policy and the lags with which monetary policy affects economic activity and inflation. At some point—as I’ve said in the last two press conferences—it will become appropriate to slow the pace of increases as we approach the level of interest rates that will be sufficiently restrictive to bring inflation down to our 2 percent goal. There is significant uncertainty around that level of interest rates. Even so, we still have some ways to go, and incoming data since our last meeting suggest that the ultimate level of interest rates will be higher than previously expected. Our decisions will depend on the totality of incoming data and their implications for the outlook for economic activity and inflation. We will continue to make our decisions meeting by meeting and communicate our thinking as clearly as possible. We are taking forceful steps to moderate demand so that it comes into better alignment with supply. Our overarching focus is using our tools to bring inflation back down to our 2 percent goal and to keep longer term inflation expectations well anchored. Reducing inflation is likely to require a sustained period of below trend growth and some softening of labor market conditions. Restoring price stability is essential to set the stage for achieving maximum employment and stable prices in the longer run. The historical record cautions strongly against prematurely loosening policy. We will stay the course until the job is done. To conclude: We understand that our actions affect communities, families, and businesses across the country. Everything we do is in service to our public mission. We at the Fed will do everything we can to achieve our maximum employment and price stability goals. Thank you, and I look forward to your questions. . So a couple things on that. We do need to see inflation coming down decisively, and good evidence of that would be a series of down monthly readings. Of course, that’s what we’d all love to see, but that’s—I’ve never thought of that as the appropriate test for slowing the pace of increases or for identifying the appropriately restrictive level that we’re aiming for. We need to bring our policy stance down to a level that’s sufficiently restrictive to bring inflation down to our 2 percent objective over the medium term. How will we know that we’ve reached that level? Well, we’ll take into account the full range of analysis and data that bear on that question, guided by our assessment of how much financial conditions have tightened, the effects that that tightening is actually having on the real economy and on inflation, taking into consideration lags, as I mentioned. We will be looking at real rates, for example, all across the yield curve and all other financial conditions as we make that assessment. . So, what I want to do is put that question of pace in the context of our broader tightening program, if I may, and talk about the statement language along the way. So I think you can think about our tightening program as really addressing three questions, the first of which was, and has been, how fast to go. The second is how high to raise our policy rate. And the third will be, eventually, how long to remain at a restrictive level. So on the first question—how fast to tighten policy—it’s been very important that we move expeditiously, and we have clearly done so. We’ve moved 3¾ percent since March, admittedly from a base of zero. It’s a historically fast pace, and that’s certainly appropriate given the persistence and strength in inflation and the low level from which we started. So now we come to the second question, which is how high to raise our policy rate. And we’re saying that we’d raise that rate to a level that’s sufficiently restrictive to bring inflation to our 2 percent target over time, and we put that into our postmeeting statement because that really does become the important question, we think now, is how far to go. And I’ll talk more about that. We think there’s some ground to cover before we meet that test, and that’s why we say that ongoing rate increases will be appropriate. And, as I mentioned, incoming data between the meetings, both a strong labor market report but particularly the CPI report, do suggest to me that we may ultimately move to higher levels than we thought at the time of the September meeting. That level is very uncertain, though, and I would say we’re going to find it over time. Of course, with the lags between policy and economic activity, there’s a lot of uncertainty, so we note that in determining the pace of future increases, we’ll take into account the cumulative tightening of monetary policy as well as the lags with which monetary policy affects economic activity and inflation. So I would say, as we come closer to that level, move more into restrictive territory, the question of speed becomes less important than the second and third questions. And that’s why I’ve said at the last two press conferences that at some point, it will become appropriate to slow the pace of increases. So that time is coming, and it may come as soon as the next meeting or the one after that. No decision has been made. It is likely we’ll have a discussion about this at the next meeting, a discussion. To be clear, let me say again [that] the question of when to moderate the pace of increases is now much less important than the question of how high to raise rates and how long to keep monetary policy restricted, which really will be our principal focus. . Well, I think I’m pleased that we have moved as fast as we have. I don’t think we’ve overtightened. I think there’s—very difficult to make a case that our current level is too tight, given that inflation still runs well above the federal funds rate. So I think that at this meeting, as in the last two meetings, as I’ve mentioned, I’ve said that we—that there would come a point, and this was a meeting at which we had a discussion about what that might mean. And we did discuss this, and, as I mentioned, we’ll discuss it again in December. But there’s no—I don’t have any sense that we’ve overtightened or moved too fast. I think it’s been good and a successful program that we’ve gotten this far this fast. Remember, though, that we still think there’s a need for ongoing rate increases, and we have some ground left to cover here, and cover it we will. . So this is the question of, does the policy rate need to get above the inflation rate? And I would say, there are a range of views on it. That’s the classic “Taylor principle” view. But I would think you’d look more at a forward, a forward looking measure of inflation to look at that. But I think the answer is, we’ll want to get the policy rate to a level where it is, where the real interest rate is positive. We will want to do that. I do not think of it as the single and only touchstone, though. I think you put some weight on that  you also put some weight on rates across the curve. Very few people borrow at the short end—at the federal funds rate, for example. So households and businesses, if they’re [borrowing]—[there are] very meaningfully positive interest rates all across the curve for them, credit spreads are larger, so borrowing rates are significantly higher, and I think financial conditions have tightened quite a bit. So I would look at that as an important feature. I’d put some weight on it, but I wouldn’t say it’s something that is the single, dominant thing to look at. . I don’t have a specific number for you there. There are many, many models that look at that. And, I mean, one way to look at it is that it’s a pretty stationary object and that when inflation runs—above that level, for sure—substantially above for some time, you’ll see it move up, but the movement will be fairly gradual. So I think that’s what the principal models would tend to say. But I wouldn’t want to land on any one assessment. There are many different—as you know, many different people publish an assessment of underlying inflation. . Is inflation becoming entrenched? So I guess I would start by pointing to expectations. So if we saw longer term expectations moving up, that would be very troubling. And they were moving up a little bit at the middle part of this year, and they’ve moved now back down. That’s one piece of data. Shorter term inflation expectations moved up between the last meeting and this meeting, and we don’t think those are as indicative, but they may be important in the wage setting process. There’s a school of thought that believes that. So that’s very concerning. I guess the other thing I would say is that the longer we have—we’re now 18 months into this episode of high inflation, and we don’t have a clearly identified, scientific way of understanding at what point inflation becomes entrenched. And so the thing we need to do from a risk management standpoint is to use our tools forcefully but thoughtfully and get inflation under control—get it down to 2 percent—get it behind us. That’s what we really need to do and what we’re strongly committed to doing. . So the way I would think about that is, it’s commonly, for a long time, thought that monetary policy works with “long and variable lags,” and that it works first on financial conditions and then on economic activity and then perhaps later than that even on inflation. So that’s been the thinking for a long time. There was an old literature that made those lags out to be fairly long. There’s newer literature that says that they’re shorter. The truth is, we don’t have a lot of data [consisting] of inflation of [rates] this high in what is, now, the modern economy. One big difference now is that it used to be that you would raise the federal funds rate, financial conditions would react, and then that would affect economic activity and inflation. Now financial conditions react well before in expectation of monetary policy [actions]. That’s the way it has moved for a quarter of a century—in the direction of financial conditions, then monetary policy—because the markets are thinking, what is the central bank going to do? And there are plenty of economists that also think that once financial conditions change, that the effects on the economy are actually faster than they would have been before. We don’t know that. I guess the thing that I would say is: It’s highly uncertain—highly uncertain. And so from a risk management standpoint—but we do need, it would be irresponsible not to, to ignore them. But you want to consider them but not take them literally. So I think it’s a very difficult place to be, but I would tend to be—want to be in the middle looking carefully at what’s actually happening with the economy and trying to make good decisions from a risk management standpoint, remembering, of course, that if we were to overtighten, we could then use our tools strongly to support the economy, whereas if we don’t get inflation under control because we don’t tighten enough, now we’re in a situation where inflation will become entrenched and the costs, the employment costs in particular, will be much higher potentially. So from a risk  management standpoint, we want to be sure that we don’t make the mistake of either failing to tighten enough or loosening policy too soon. . I think as we move now into restrictive territory, as we make these ongoing rate hikes and policy becomes more restrictive, it’ll be appropriate now to be thinking more about lags. Of course, we think about lags—the lags are just sort of a basic part of monetary policy. But we will be thinking about them, but we won’t be—I think we’ll be considering them but because it’s appropriate to do so. Let me say this: It is very premature to be thinking about pausing. So people, when they hear lags, they think about a pause. It’s very premature, in my view, to think about or be talking about pausing our rate hike. We have a ways to go. Our policy—we need ongoing rate hikes to get to that level of sufficiently restrictive. And we don’t—of course, we don’t really know exactly where that is. We have a sense, and we’ll write down in September—sorry, in the December meeting, a new Summary of Economic Projections, which updates that. But I would expect us to continue to update it based on what we’re seeing with incoming data. . I don’t know that the channels through which policy works have changed that much. I would say a big channel is the labor market, and the labor market is very, very strong. Very strong. And households, of course, have strong balance sheets. So we go into this with a strong labor market and excess demand in the labor market, as you can see through many different things, and also with households who have strong spending power built up. So it may take time, it may take resolve, it may take patience. It’s likely to, to get inflation down. It may—I think you see, from our forecasts and others, that it will take some time for inflation to come down. It’ll take time, we think. So, sorry, was I getting to your question there? . Oh, housing—the housing part of it. Yes, so we look at housing—of course, housing is significantly affected by these higher rates, which are really back where they were before the Global Financial Crisis—they’re not historically high, but they’re much higher than they’ve been. And you’re seeing housing activity decline, and you’re seeing housing prices growing at a faster rate and, in some parts of the country, declining. You know, I would say housing was—the housing market was very overheated for the couple of years after the pandemic as demand increased and rates were low. We all know the stories of how overheated the housing market was, prices going up. Many, many bidders and no conditions, that kind of thing. So the housing market needs to get back into a balance between supply and demand. We’re well aware of what’s going on there. From a financial stability standpoint, we didn’t see in this cycle the kinds of poor credit underwriting that we saw before the Global Financial Crisis. Housing credit was very carefully—much more carefully managed by the lenders. So it’s a very different situation and doesn’t present potential financial—doesn’t appear to present financial stability issues. But, no, we do understand that that’s really where a very big effect of our policy is. . So we talk a lot about vacancies in the—vacancy to unemployed rate, but it’s just one, it’s just another data series. It’s been unusually important in this cycle because it’s been so out of line. But so has quits. So have wages. So we look at a very wide range of data on the unemployment—on the labor market. So I’d start with unemployment, which is typically the single statistic you would look to, is at a 50 year low, 3½ percent. We’re getting really nothing in labor supply now. We had, I think, very small increase this year, which we had really thought, we thought we would get that back. Most analysts thought we would get some labor supply coming in. You mentioned wages, so I guess I would characterize that as sort of a mixed picture. It’s true, with average hourly earnings, you see—so I would call it a flattening out at a level that’s well above the level that would be consistent over time with 2 percent inflation, assuming a reasonable productivity. With the ECI reading this week, again, a mixed picture. The headline number was a disappointment. Let’s just say it was high. It didn’t show a decline. There’s some rays of light inside that if you look at private sector workers—that did come down, that compensation did come down. Overall, though, the broader picture is of an overheated labor market where demand substantially exceeds supply. Job creation still exceeds sort of the level that would hold the market where it is. So that’s the picture. Do we see—we keep looking for signs that sort of the beginning of a gradual softening is happening. And maybe that’s there, but it’s not obvious to me, because wages aren’t coming down—they’re just moving sideways at an elevated level, both ECI and average hourly earnings. We want to see—we would love to see vacancies coming down, quits coming down. They are coming down. Vacancies are below their all time high but not by as much as we thought, because—and the data series is volatile, we never take any one reading, we always look at two or three. So it’s a mixed picture. I don’t see the case for real softening just yet. But we look at, I guess as I just showed you, we look at a very broad range of data on the labor market. . I think wages have an effect on inflation and inflation has an effect on wages. I think that’s always been the case. There’s always—going back and forth, the question is, is that really elevated right now? I don’t think so. I don’t think wages are the principal story of why prices are going up. I don’t think that. I also don’t think that we see a wage–price spiral, but, again, it’s not something you can—once you see it, you’re in trouble. So we don’t want to see it. We want wages to go up—we just want them to go up at a level that’s sustainable and consistent with 2 percent inflation. And we think we can—we do think that, given the data that we have, that this labor market can soften without having to soften as much as history would indicate through the unemployment channel. It can soften through job openings declining. We think there’s room for that. But we won’t know that—that’ll be, that’ll be discovered empirically. . So, of course, we, we keep close tabs on economic developments and also geopolitical developments that are relevant to the economy abroad. We’re in very frequent contact with our foreign counterparts both through the IMF meetings and the regular meetings with central banks that we have, and I have one this weekend with many, many central bankers. So we’re in touch with all of that. So I guess what—it’s clearly a time, a difficult time in the global economy. We’re seeing very high inflation in Europe, significantly because of high energy prices related to the war in Ukraine. And we’re seeing China’s having issues with the zero COVID policy and much slower growth than we’re used to seeing. So we’re seeing—we see those difficulties. The strong dollar is a challenge for some countries. But we haven’t—we take all of that into account in our models. We think about the spillovers and that sort of thing. Here in the United States, we have a strong economy, and we have an economy where inflation is running at 5 percent. Core PCE inflation—which is a really good indicator of what’s going on for us, the way we see it—is running at 5.1 percent on a 12 month basis and sort of similar to that on a 3 , 6 , and 9 month basis. So we know that we need to use our tools to get inflation under control. The world’s not going to be better off if we fail to do that. That’s a task we need to do. Price stability in the United States is a good thing for the global economy over a long period of time. Price stability is the kind of thing that pays dividends for our economy—for decades, hopefully—even though it may be difficult to get it back. Getting it back is something that gives—that provides value to the people we serve for the long run. . So we don’t directly affect, for the most part, food and energy prices, but the demand channel does affect them just at the margin. The thing about the United States is that we also have strong—in many other jurisdictions, the principal problem really is energy. In the United States, we also have a demand issue. We’ve got an imbalance between demand and supply, which you see in many parts of the economy. So our tools are well suited to work on that problem, and that’s what we’re doing. You’re right, though. We don’t—the price of oil is set globally, and it’s not something we can affect. I think by the actions that we take, though, we help keep longer term inflation expectations anchored and keep the public believing in 2 percent inflation by the things that we do, even in times when energy is part of the story of why inflation is high. . Sure. So you’re right—the public’s trust is really the Fed’s and any central bank’s most important asset, and any time one of us, one of the policymakers, violates or falls short of those rules, we do risk undermining that trust, and we take that very seriously. We do. So at the beginning of our meeting yesterday, actually, we had a Committee discussion of the full Committee on the importance of holding ourselves individually and collectively accountable for knowing and following the high standard that’s set out in our existing rules with respect to both personal investment activities and external communications. And we’ve taken a number of steps, and I would just say we do understand how important those issues are. I would say that our new investment program that we have is up now and running, and, actually, it was through that that the problems with President Bostic’s disclosures were discovered, when he filed his new disclosure. We now have a central group here at the Board of Governors that looks into disclosures and follows them and approves people’s disclosures and also all of their trades. Any trade anyone has to make is covered, has to be approved, preapproved, and there’s a lag—it has to be preapproved 45 days before it happens, so there’s no ability to game markets. So it’s a really good system. It worked here. And we—I think we all said to each other today— yesterday, actually, yesterday morning, we recommitted to each other and to this institution to hold ourselves to the highest standards and avoid these problems. . I don’t. So, as you know, I referred the matter concerning President Bostic to the inspector general, and once that happens, I don’t discuss it with the inspector general or with anybody. It’s just—the inspector general has, he has the ability to do investigations. We don’t really have that. So that’s what he’s doing. . Well, so we do monitor the near term forward spread—you’re right. And it’s—that’s been our preferred measure. We think, just empirically, it dominates the ones that people tend to look at, which is 2s, 10s, and things like that. So it’s not inverted. And, also, you have to look at why things—why the rate curve is doing what it’s doing. It can be doing that because it affects—it expects cuts or because it expects inflation to come down. In this case, if you’re in a situation where the markets are pricing in significant declines in inflation, that’s going to affect the forward curve. So, yes, we monitor it. You’re right. And that’s what I would say. . Well, what’s happened is, time has passed, and we’ve raised interest rates by 375 basis points. I would not—I would not change a word in that statement, though. I think until we get inflation down, you’ll be hearing that from me. Again, if we overtighten—and we don’t want to, we want to get this exactly right—but if we overtighten, then we have the ability with our tools, which are powerful, to, as we showed at the beginning of the pandemic episode, we can support economic activity strongly if that happens, if that’s necessary. On the other hand, if you make the mistake in the other direction and you let this drag on, then it’s a year or two down the road, and you’re realizing, inflation behaving the way it can, you’re realizing you didn’t actually get it, you have to go back in. By then, the risk, really, is that it has become entrenched in people’s thinking. And the record is that the employment costs—the cost to the people that we don’t want to hurt—they go up with the passage of time. That’s really how I look at it. So that isn’t going to change. What has changed, though—you’re right—is, we’re farther along now. And I think as we’re farther along, we’re now focused on that. What’s the place, what’s the level we need to get to rates? And I don’t know what we’ll do when we get there, by the way. It doesn’t—we’ll have to see. There’s been no decision or discussion around exactly what steps we would take at that point. But the first thing is to find your way there. . So this is an interesting subject. So I start by saying, I guess, that the measure that’s in the CPI and the PCE, it captures rents for all tenants, not just new leases. And that makes sense, actually, because for that reason—conceptually, that is—that’s sort of the right target for monetary policy. And the same thing is true for owners’ equivalent rent, which comes off of—it’s a reweighting of tenant rents. The private measures are, of course, good at picking up, at the margin, the new leases, and they tell you a couple things. One thing is, I think right now, if you look at the pattern of that series of the new leases, it’s very pro cyclical, so rents went up much more than the CPI and PCE rents did. And now they’re coming down faster. But what you’re—the implication is that there are still, as people, as non new leases roll over and expire, right, they’re still in the pipeline, there’s still some significant rate increases coming, okay? But at some point, once you get through that, the new leases are going to tell you—what they’re telling you is, there will come a point at which rent inflation will start to come down. But that point is well out from where we are now. So we’re well aware of that, of course, and we look at it. But I would say that in terms of—the right way to think about inflation, really, is to look at the measure that we do look at, but considering that we also know that at some point, you’ll see rents coming down. . We’re not targeting any one or two particular things. Our message should be—what I’m trying to do is make sure that our message is clear, which is that we think we have a ways to go, we have some ground to cover with interest rates before we get to, before we get to that level of interest rates that we think is sufficiently restrictive. And putting that in the statement and identifying that as a goal is an important step. And that’s meant to put that question, really, as the important one now, going forward. I’ve also said that we think that the level of rates that we estimated in September—the incoming data suggests that that’s actually going to be higher, and that’s been the pattern. I mean, I would have little confidence that the forecast—if we made a forecast today, if we were doing an SEP today, the pattern has been that, one after another, they go up, and that’ll end when it ends, but there’s no sense that inflation is coming down. If you look at the—I have a table of the last 12 months of 12 month readings, and there’s really no pattern there. We’re exactly where we were a year ago. So I would also say, it’s premature to discuss pausing. And it’s not something that we’re thinking about. That’s really not a conversation to be had now. We have a ways to go. And the last thing I’ll say is that I would want people to understand our commitment to getting this done and to not making the mistake of not doing enough or the mistake of withdrawing our strong policy and doing that too soon. So those—I control those messages, and that’s my job. . In theory, it was a headwind this year, but I do think the broader context is that you have households that have these significant amounts of savings and can keep spending even in—so I think those two things do tend to wage—to sort of counterbalance each other out. It appears, consumer spending is still positive—it’s at pretty modest growth levels. It’s not shrinking. The banks that deal with retail customers and many retailers will tell you that the consumers are still buying and they’re still—they’re fine. So I don’t know how big the fiscal headwinds are, and they haven’t shown up in the way that we thought they would in restraining spending. So it must have to do with the savings that people have. . Demand is going to have some support from those savings and also from the strong demand that’s still in the labor market. We still see pretty significant demand and a tightening labor market in some respects, although I think, overall, I would say it’s not really tightening or loosening. So we see those things, and what those things tell us is that our job is going to require some resolve and some patience over time. We’re going to have to stick with this. And that’s just—we take all that as a given, but we know what our objective is, and we know what our tools can do, and that’s how we think about it. . Has it narrowed? Yes. Is it still possible? Yes. We’ve always said it was going to be difficult, but I think to the extent rates have to go higher and stay higher for longer, it becomes harder to see the path—it’s narrowed. I would say the path has narrowed over the course of the last year, really. Hard to say. Hard to say. Again, I would say that the sort of array of data in the labor market is highly unusual and, to many economists, there is a path to— ordinarily there’s a relationship to GDP going down and vacancies declining, translating into unemployment, or there’s Okun’s law. So all those things are relationships that are in the data, and they’re very real. Data’s a little bit different this time, though, because you have this tremendously high level of vacancies and, we think, on a very steep part of the Beveridge curve. All I would say is that the job losses may turn out to be less than would be indicated by those traditional measures, because job openings are so elevated and because the labor market is so strong. Again, that’s going to be something we discover empirically. I think no one knows whether there’s going to be a recession or not and, if so, how bad that recession would be. And our job is to restore price stability so that we can have a strong labor market that benefits all over time. And that’s what we’re going to do. . Because we haven’t seen inflation coming down. The implication of inflation not coming down. What we would expect by now to have seen is that as the—really, as the supply side problems have resolved themselves, we would have expected goods inflation to come down by now, long since by now. And it really hasn’t. Actually, it has come down, but not to the extent that we had hoped. At the same time, now you see services inflation, core services inflation moving up, and I just think that the inflation picture has become more and more challenging over the course of this year, without question. That means that we have to have policy be more restrictive, and that narrows the path to a soft landing, I would say. Thanks very much.

****FOMCpresconf20221214

. Good afternoon. Before I go into the details of today’s meeting, I would like to underscore for the American people that we understand the hardship that high inflation is causing and that we are strongly committed to bringing inflation back down to our 2 percent goal. Over the course of the year, we have taken forceful actions to tighten the stance of monetary policy. We have covered a lot of ground, and the full effects of our rapid tightening so far are yet to be felt. Even so, we have more work to do. Price stability is the responsibility of the Federal Reserve and serves as the bedrock of our economy. Without price stability, the economy doesn’t work for anyone. In particular, without price stability, we will not achieve a sustained period of strong labor market conditions that benefit all. Today, the FOMC raised our policy interest rate by ½ percentage point. We continue to anticipate that ongoing increases will be appropriate in order to attain a stance of monetary policy that is sufficiently restrictive to return inflation to 2 percent over time. In addition, we are continuing the process of significantly reducing the size of our balance sheet. Restoring price stability will likely require maintaining a restrictive policy stance for some time. I will have more to say about today’s monetary policy actions after briefly reviewing economic developments. The U.S. economy has slowed significantly from last year’s rapid pace. Although real GDP rose at a pace of 2.9 percent last quarter, it is roughly unchanged through the first three quarters of this year. Recent indicators point to modest growth of spending and production this quarter. Growth in consumer spending has slowed from last year’s rapid pace, in part reflecting lower real disposable income and tighter financial conditions. Activity in the housing sector has weakened significantly, largely reflecting higher mortgage rates. Higher interest rates and slower output growth also appear to be weighing on business fixed investment. As shown in our Summary of Economic Projections, the median projection for real GDP growth stands at just 0.5 percent this year and next, well below the median estimate of the longer run normal growth rate. Despite the slowdown in growth, the labor market remains extremely tight, with the unemployment rate near a 50 year low, job vacancies still very high, and wage growth elevated. Job gains have been robust, with employment rising by an average of 272,000 jobs per month over the last three months. Although job vacancies have moved below their highs and the pace of job gains has slowed from earlier in the year, the labor market continues to be out of balance, with demand substantially exceeding the supply of available workers. The labor force participation rate is little changed since the beginning of the year. FOMC participants expect supply and demand conditions in the labor market to come into better balance over time, easing upward pressures on wages and prices. The median projection in the SEP for the unemployment rate rises to 4.6 percent at the end of next year. Inflation remains well above our longer run goal of 2 percent. Over the 12 months ending in October, total PCE prices rose 6 percent  excluding the volatile food and energy categories, core PCE prices rose 5 percent. In November, the 12 month change in the CPI was 7.1 percent, and the change in the core CPI was 6 percent. The inflation data received so far for October and November show a welcome reduction in the monthly pace of price increases. But it will take substantially more evidence to give confidence that inflation is on a sustained downward path. Price pressures remain evident across a broad range of goods and services. Russia’s war against Ukraine has boosted prices for energy and food and has contributed to upward pressure on inflation. The median projection in the SEP for total PCE inflation is 5.6 percent this year and falls to 3.1 percent next year, 2.5 percent in 2024, and 2.1 percent in 2025  participants continue to see risks to inflation as weighted to the upside. Despite elevated inflation, longer term inflation expectations appear to remain well anchored, as reflected in a broad range of surveys of households, businesses, and forecasters as well as measures from financial markets. But that is not grounds for complacency  the longer the current bout of high inflation continues, the greater the chance that expectations of higher inflation will become entrenched. The Fed’s monetary policy actions are guided by our mandate to promote maximum employment and stable prices for the American people. My colleagues and I are acutely aware that high inflation imposes significant hardship as it erodes purchasing power, especially for those least able to meet the higher costs of essentials like food, housing, and transportation. We are highly attentive to the risks that high inflation poses to both sides of our mandate, and we are strongly committed to returning inflation to our 2 percent objective. At today’s meeting, the Committee raised the target range for the federal funds rate by ½ percentage point, bringing the target range to 4¼ to 4½ percent. And we are continuing the process of significantly reducing the size of our balance sheet. With today’s action, we have raised interest rates by 4¼ percentage points this year. We continue to anticipate that ongoing increases in the target range for the federal funds rate will be appropriate in order to attain a stance of monetary policy that is sufficiently restrictive to return inflation to 2 percent over time. Over the course of the year, financial conditions have tightened significantly in response to our policy actions. Financial conditions fluctuate in the short term in response to many factors, but it is important that, over time, they reflect the policy restraint that we are putting in place to return inflation to 2 percent. We are seeing the effects on demand in the most interest sensitive sectors of the economy, such as housing. It will take time, however, for the full effects of monetary restraint to be realized, especially on inflation. In light of the cumulative tightening of monetary policy and the lags with which monetary policy affects economic activity and inflation, the Committee decided to raise interest rates by 50 basis points today, a step down from the 75 basis point pace seen over the previous four meetings. Of course, 50 basis points is still a historically large increase, and we still have some ways to go. As shown in the SEP, the median projection for the appropriate level of the federal funds rate is 5.1 percent at the end of next year, ½ percentage point higher than projected in September. The median projection is 4.1 percent at the end of 2024 and 3.1 percent at the end of 2025, still above the median estimate of its longer run value. Of course, these projections do not represent a Committee decision or plan, and no one knows with any certainty where the economy will be a year or more from now. Our decisions will depend on the totality of incoming data and their implications for the outlook for economic activity and inflation. And we will continue to make our decisions meeting by meeting and communicate our thinking as clearly as possible. We are taking forceful steps to moderate demand so that it comes into better alignment with supply. Our overarching focus is using our tools to bring inflation back down to our 2 percent goal and to keep longer term inflation expectations well anchored. Reducing inflation is likely to require a sustained period of below trend growth and some softening of labor market conditions. Restoring price stability is essential to set the stage for achieving maximum employment and stable prices over the longer run. The historical record cautions strongly against prematurely loosening policy. We will stay the course until the job is done. To conclude: We understand that our actions affect communities, families, and businesses across the country. Everything we do is in service to our public mission. We at the Fed will do everything we can to achieve our maximum employment and price stability goals. Thank you. I will look forward to your questions. . So, as I mentioned, it is important that overall financial conditions continue to reflect the policy restraint that we’re putting in place to bring inflation down to 2 percent. We think that financial conditions have tightened significantly in the past year. But our policy actions work through financial conditions. And those, in turn, affect economic activity, the labor market, and inflation. So what we control is our policy moves in the communications that we make. Financial conditions both anticipate, and react to, our actions. I would add that our focus is not on short term moves, but on persistent moves. And many, many things, of course, move financial conditions over time. I would say it’s our judgment today that we’re not at a sufficiently restrictive policy stance yet, which is why we say that we would expect that ongoing hikes would be appropriate. And I would point you to the SEP again for our current assessment of what that peak level will be. As you will have seen, 19 people filled out the SEP this time, and 17 of those 19 wrote down a peak rate of 5 percent or more—in the 5s. So that’s our best assessment today for what we think the peak rate will be. You will also know that, at each subsequent SEP during the course of this year, we’ve actually increased our estimate of what that peak rate will be. And today we’re—the SEP that was published shows again that, overwhelmingly, FOMC participants believe that inflation risks are to the upside. So I can’t tell you confidently that we won’t move up our estimate of the peak rate again at the next SEP. I don’t know what we’ll do. It will depend on future data. What we’re writing down today is our best estimate of what we think that peak rate will be, based on what we know. Obviously, if data—if the inflation data come in worse, that could move up. And it could move down if inflation data are softer. . So, as I’ve been saying, as we’ve gone through the course of this year, as we lifted off and got into the course of the year and we saw the—how strong inflation was and how persistent, it was very important to move quickly. In fact, the speed—the pace with which we’re moving was the most important thing. I think now that we’re coming to the end of this year, we’ve raised 425 basis points this year, and we’re into restrictive territory. It’s now not so important how fast we go. It’s far more important to think, what is the ultimate level? And then it’s—at a certain point, the question will become, how long do we remain restrictive? That will become the most important question. But I would say the most important question now is no longer the speed. So—and that applies to February as well. So I think we’ll make the February decision based on the incoming data and where we see financial conditions, where we see the economy. And that’ll be the key thing, but—I mean, for that decision. But, ultimately, that question about how high to raise rates is going to be one that we make looking at our progress on inflation, looking at where financial conditions are, and making an assessment of whether policy is restrictive enough. [As] I’ve told you today, we have an assessment that we’re not at a restrictive enough stance, even with today’s move. And we’ve laid out our own—our individual assessments of what we would need to do to get there. At a certain point, though, we’ll get to that point. And then the question will be, how long do we stay there? And there, the strong view on the Committee is that we’ll need to stay there, you know, until we’re really confident that inflation is coming down in a sustained way. And we think that that will be some time. Now, why do I say that? If you look at—you can break inflation down into three, sort of, buckets. The first is goods inflation, and we see now, as we’ve been expecting, really, for a year and a half, that supply conditions would get better. And, ultimately, supply chains get fixed, and demand settles down a little bit and maybe goes back to services a little bit. And we start to see goods inflation coming down. We’re now starting to see that in this report and the last one. Then you go to housing services. We know the story there is that housing services inflation has been very, very high and will continue to go up, actually. As rents expire and have to be renewed, they’re going to be renewed into a market where rates are higher than they were when the original leases were signed. But we see that the new leases that are—that the rate for new leases is coming down. So, once we work our way through that backlog, that inflation will come down sometime next year. The third piece, which is something like 55 percent of the index, PCE core inflation index, is non housing related core services. And that’s really a function of the labor market, largely. The biggest cost, by far, in that sector is labor. And we do see a very, very strong labor market, one where we haven’t seen much softening, where job growth is very high, where wages are very high. Vacancies are quite elevated, and, really, there’s an imbalance in the labor market between supply and demand. So that part of it, which is the biggest part, is likely to take a substantial period to get down. The other—you know, the goods inflation has turned pretty quickly now after not turning at all for a year and a half. Now it seems to be turning. But there’s an expectation, really, that the services inflation will not move down so quickly, so that we’ll have to stay at it, so that we may have to raise rates higher to get to where we want to go. And that’s really why we are writing down those high rates and why we’re expecting that they’ll have to remain high for a time. . Well, I’ll tell you what the projection is. I don’t think it would qualify as a recession, though, because you’ve got positive growth. The expectations in the SEP are basically as you said, which is, we’ve got growth at a modest level, which is to say that ½ percentage point, that’s positive growth. It’s slow growth. It’s well below trend. It’s not going to feel like a boom. It’s going to feel like very slow growth, right? In that condition, labor market conditions are softening a bit. Unemployment does go up a bit. I would say that many analysts believe that the natural rate of unemployment is actually elevated at this moment. So it’s not clear that those forecasts of inflation are really much above the natural rate of unemployment. We can never identify its location with great precision. But that 4.7 percent is still a strong labor market. If you look—you know, you’ve got—the reports we get from the field are that companies are very reluctant to lay people off, other than the tech companies, which is, you know, a story unto itself. Generally, companies want to hold onto the workers they have because it’s been very, very hard to hire. So you’ve got all these vacancies out there—far in excess of the number of employed people. That doesn’t sound like a—you know, a labor market where a lot of people will need to be put out of work. So that we—you know, there are channels through which the labor market can come back into balance with relatively modest increases in unemployment, we believe. None of that is guaranteed, but that is what their forecast reflects. . So I haven’t made a judgment on what size rate hike to make at the last meeting. But, you know, what you said is broadly right, which is, having moved so quickly and having now so much restraint that’s still in the pipeline, we think that the appropriate thing to do now is to move to a slower pace. And, you know, that will allow us to feel our way and— you know, and get to that level, we think, and better balance the risks that we face. So that’s the idea. It makes a lot of sense, it seems to me—particularly if you consider how far we’ve come. But, again, I can’t tell you today what the actual size of that will be. It will depend on a variety of factors, including the incoming data in particular, the state of the economy, the state of financial conditions. . No. Absolutely not. No. As a—just a matter of practice, the SEP reflects any data that’s—that comes out during the meeting. And participants know that they have the—they know this—that they can make changes to their SEP during the meeting, you know, well in advance of the press conference so that we’re not running around. But that’s not the case. It’s never the case that the SEPs don’t reflect an important piece of data that came in on the first day of the meeting. . No. It’s not about the strength of the labor market. The labor market is clearly very strong. It is more just that, you know, by now, we had expected—we’ve continually expected to make faster progress on inflation than we have, ultimately. And that’s why the peak rate for this year goes up between this meeting and the September meeting. You see that—you see the fact that we’ve made less progress than expected on inflation. So that’s why that goes up. And that’s why unemployment goes up, because we’re having to tighten policy more. And so it didn’t go up by much in the meeting, I don’t think. But that’s the idea, is slower progress on inflation, tighter policy, probably higher rates probably held for longer just to get to where you—the kind of restriction that you need to get inflation down to 2 percent. . It’s very hard to say. You know, there—you can look at history, right? And history would, you know, would say that, in a situation like this, the declines in unemployment would be more meaningful, I think, than what you see written down there. But why do we think that is the case? So, I’ll give you a few reasons. First just is that there’s this huge overhang of vacancies, meaning that vacancies can come down a fair amount. And we’re hearing from many companies that they don’t want to lay people off—so that they’ll keep people because it’s been so hard. I mean, I think we’ve—it feels like we have a structural labor shortage out there where there are, you know, 4 million fewer people, a little more than 4 million who were in the workforce available to work than there’s demand for workforce. So the fact that there’s a strong labor market, you know, means that companies will hold on to workers. And it means that it may take longer, but it also means that the costs in unemployment may be less. Again, that we’re going to find out empirically. But I think that’s a reasonably possible outcome. And you do hear, you know, many, many labor economists believe that it is. So we’ll see, though. . Well, I think that’s why one of the reasons it went up was that core came in stronger this year. Yeah. What you see is our best estimate, as of today—really, as of today—for how high we need to raise rates to—how much we need to tighten policy to create enough, you know, restrictive policy to slow economic activity and slow—soften the labor market and bring inflation down through those channels. That’s all—that is the estimate—best estimate—we make today. And, as I mentioned, we’ll make another estimate for the next SEP. And we’ll, you know, of course, between meetings, we do the same thing, but we don’t publish it. . We’re going into next year with higher inflation than we had thought, right? So we’re actually moving down to—the level that we’re moving down to next year is still a very large drop in inflation from where inflation is running now, well more than 1 percent change in inflation. But remember that the jump[ing] off point at the beginning of the year is higher. So, you know, we—we’re moving down still by a very large chunk. I don’t think it’s having—I don’t think the policy is having any less effect. It’s just starting from a higher level at the end of 2022. So we’re getting down. I believe the median is 3½ percent. That would be—that’s a pretty significant drop in inflation. And, you know, where’s it coming from? It’s coming from the goods sector, clearly. By the middle of next year, we should begin to see lower inflation from the housing services sector. And then, you know, the big question is, when we—how much will you see from the largest, the 55 percent of the index, which is the non housing services sector? And, you know, that’s where you need to see—we believe you need to see a better balancing of supply and demand in the labor market so that you have—it’s not that we don’t want wage increases. We want strong wage increases. We just want them to be at a level that’s consistent with 2 percent inflation. Right now that—if you put into—if you factor in productivity estimates, standard productivity estimates, wages are running, you know, well above what would be consistent with 2 percent inflation. . You know, our focus right now is really on moving our policy stance to one that is restrictive enough to ensure a return of inflation to our 2 percent goal over time. It’s not on rate cuts. And we think that we’ll have to maintain a restrictive stance of policy for some time. Historical experience cautions strongly against prematurely loosening policy. I guess I would say it this way: I wouldn’t see us considering rate cuts until the Committee is confident that inflation is moving down to 2 percent in a sustained way. So that’s the test I would articulate. And you’re correct. There are not rate cuts in the SEP for 2023. . So you’re right. Those two things will offset each other. Weaker output in China will push down on commodity prices, but it could interfere with supply chains ultimately. And that could push inflation up in the West. It’s very hard to say, you know, how much—how those two will offset each other. And it doesn’t seem likely, actually, that the overall net effect would be material on us. But, to your point, China faces a very challenging situation in reopening. You know, we’ve seen, waves of COVID all around the world can interfere with economic activity. China, a very critical manufacturing—place for manufacturing and exporting. Their supply chain is very important. And China faces a reopening. They’ve— you know, they’ve backed away from their COVID restriction policies. There could be very significant increases in COVID. And we’ll just have to see. It’s a risky situation. It—but, again, it doesn’t seem like it’s likely to have material overall effects on us. . Right. So the data that we’ve received so far for October and November, we don’t have the—some of the—we have some remaining data to get in November, but they clearly do show a welcome reduction in the monthly pace of price increases. As I mentioned in my opening statement, it will take substantially more evidence to give confidence that inflation is on a sustained downward path. So the way we think about this is this: This report is very much in line with what we’ve been expecting and hoping for. And what it does is, it provides greater confidence in our forecast of declining inflation. As I mentioned, we’ve been expecting significant—forecasting significant declines in overall inflation and core inflation in the coming year. And this is the kind of reading that it will take to support that. So, really, this gives us greater confidence in our forecasts rather than, at this point, changing our forecast. In terms of the pieces, we have been expecting goods inflation to come down as supply chain pressures eased. That’s happening now. Housing services—as I mentioned, there’s good news in the pipeline. As long as housing—new housing leases show declining inflation, that will show up in the measure around the middle of next year. So that should help. And the big piece, again, is core services, ex housing, which is very important. And we have a ways to go there. You do see some beginning signs there. But, ultimately, that’s the big—the more than half, as I mentioned, of PCE core index. And it’s very fundamentally about the labor market and wages. If you look at wages, look at the average hourly earnings number we got with the last payrolls report, you don’t really see much progress in terms of average hourly earnings coming down. Now, there may be composition effects and other effects in that. So we don’t put too much weight on any one report. These things can be volatile month to month. But we will be looking for wages moving, you know, down to more normal levels where workers are doing well and, ultimately, their gains are not being eaten up by inflation. . So if I—I think I got your question. So, you know, one thing is to say is, I think our policy’s in—getting into a pretty good place now. We’re restrictive, and I think we’re—you know, we’re getting close to that level of sufficient—we think—sufficiently restrictive. We laid out today what our best estimates are to get there. And, I mean, it boils down to, how long do we think this process is going to take? And, of course, we’re—we welcome these better inflation reports for the last two months. They’re very welcome. But I think we’re realistic about the broader project. So that’s all. That’s the point I would make. It’s—you know, we see goods prices coming down. We understand what will happen with housing services. But the big story will really be the rest of it, and there’s not much progress there. And that’s going to take some time. I think my view and my colleagues’ view is that this will take some time. We’ll have to hold policy at a restrictive level for a sustained period so that, you know, two good—you know, two good monthly reports are, you know, very welcome. Of course, they’re very welcome. But we need to be honest with ourselves that there’s, you know, inflation—12 month core inflation is 6 percent CPI. That’s three times our 2 percent target. Now, it’s good to see progress. But let’s just understand we have a long ways to go to get back to price stability. . No, I wouldn’t say that. No. I don’t say that. I mean, I would say this: You know, to the extent we need to keep rates higher and keep them there for longer and inflation, you know, moves up higher and higher, I think that narrows the runway. But lower inflation readings, if they persist, in time, could certainly make it more possible. So I just—I don’t think anyone knows whether we’re going to have a recession or not and, if we do, whether it’s going to be a deep one or not. It’s just, it’s not knowable. And certainly, you know, lower inflation reports, were they to continue for a period of time, would increase the likelihood of a— put it this way, of a return to price stability that involves significantly less of an increase in unemployment than would be expected given the historical record. . So the largest amount of pain—the worst pain would come from a failure to raise rates high enough and from us allowing inflation to become entrenched in the economy so that the ultimate cost of getting it out of the economy would be very high in terms of employment, meaning very high unemployment for extended periods of time, the kind of thing that had to happen when inflation really got out of control and the Fed didn’t respond aggressively enough or soon enough in a prior episode, you know, 50 years ago. So that’s really—the worst pain would be if we failed to act. What we’re doing now is, you know, it’s raising interest rates for people. And so people are paying higher rates on mortgages and that kind of thing. There will be some softening in labor market conditions. And I wish there were a completely painless way to restore price stability. There isn’t. And this is the best we can do. I do think, though, that—and markets are pretty confident, it seems to me—that we will get inflation under control. And I believe we will. We’re certainly highly committed to do that. . That’s just—so, changing our inflation goal is just something we’re not thinking about, and it’s something we’re not going to think about. It’s—we have a 2 percent inflation goal, and we’ll use our tools to get inflation back to 2 percent. I think this isn’t the time to be thinking about that. I mean, there may be a longer run project at some point. But that is not where we are at all. The Committee—we’re not considering that. We’re not going to consider that under any circumstances. We’re going to keep our inflation target at 2 percent. We’re going to use our tools to get inflation back to 2 percent. . So the—I would go back to the labor market that we had in 2018, ’19, ’20. So, what that looked like was, wage increases for the people at the lowest end of the income spectrum were the largest. The gaps between racial groups and gender groups were at their smallest in recorded history. That’s—and all of that because of a tight labor market, a tight labor market which had inflation running, you know, just a tick below 2 percent and the economy growing right at its potential. So that seems like something that would be really good for the economy and for the country, if we could get back to that. And so that’s what all of us want to do. We want to get back to a long expansion where the labor market can remain strong over an extended period of time. That’s a really good thing for workers in the economy. And we’d love to get back to that. That’s what our goal is. You know, there’s—in the near term, we have to use our tools to restore price stability. But we, you know, we can’t—what we have to think about is the medium and longer term. If you think about it, the country went through a difficult time—I think much more difficult than we can think it would happen here. But it really set up our economy for several decades of prosperity. So price stability is something that really pays dividends for the benefit of the economy and the people in it over a very, very long period of time. And so when it is lost, for whatever reason, it has to be restored and as quickly as possible—which is what we’re doing. . We do, yes. We absolutely do. We look at—it’s our regular practice to talk about unemployment rates by different groups, including racial groups and that sort of thing. We do. We keep our eye on that. . So I don’t want to get into too many hypotheticals. But, you know, we’ll—it’s hard to deal with hypotheticals. So let me just say that we have to use our tools to support maximum employment and price stability. I’ve made it clear that right now, the labor market’s very, very strong. You’re near a 50 year low where you’re at or above maximum employment, a 50 year low in unemployment, vacancies are very high, wages—nominal wages are very high. So the labor market’s very, very strong. Where we’re missing is on the inflation side. And we’re missing by a lot on the inflation side. So that means we need to really focus on getting inflation under control, and that’s what we’ll do. I think, as the economy heals, the two goals come more into play. But right now, clearly, the focus has to be on getting inflation down. . So, what I meant by that, with “structural labor shortage,” is, if you look at where we are now, as I mentioned, there—if you just look at demand for labor, you can look at vacancies plus people who are actually working. And then you can take supply of labor by, “Are you in the labor market?” “Are you looking for a job or have a job?” And you’re 4— more than 4 million people short. We don’t see—despite very high wages and an incredibly tight labor market, we don’t see participation moving up—which is contrary to what we thought. So the upshot of all that is, the labor market is actually—it should—it’s 3½ million people, at least, smaller than it should have been based on pre pandemic. Just assume population and reasonable growth and aging of the population  our labor force should be 3½ million more than it is. And that—there’re lots of easy ways to get to bigger numbers than that if you go back a few more years. So why is that? Part of it is just accelerated retirements. People dropped out and aren’t coming back at a higher rate than expected. Part of it is that we lost a half a million people who would have been work—close to half a million who would have been working died from COVID. And part of it is that migration has been lower. We don’t prescribe—you know, it’s not our job to prescribe things. But, you know, I think if you ask businesses, you know, pretty much everybody you talk to says there aren’t enough people. We need more people. So I tried to identify that in my—in a speech I gave a month ago, but I stopped short of telling Congress what to do because, you know, they gave us a job. And we need to, you know, do that job. . No. I mean, what we do is, we make our forecasts, and we publish them quarterly. And, you know, if you look at those forecasts, those are forecasts for slow growth, for a softening labor market, by which I mean, unemployment goes up but not a great deal. And you see inflation coming down. You see rates going up a lot. You see inflation coming down. Those are those forecasts, and that’s really what they show. We’re not—of course, we don’t talk about, you know, this kind of a recession and that kind of a recession. We just, you know, we make those forecasts. The staff runs—and you will see this if you look at the old Tealbooks—runs alternative simulations of all different kinds at every meeting, and we look at those, too. And those will explore different things. But that’s just, you know, upside and downside scenarios. Of course, that’s a responsible practice that we’ve carried on for many decades. But, no, we don’t—we haven’t asked ourselves that question. . So we do know that. Of course, that’s something that we know we’d see. But, as I mentioned, you know, we wouldn’t—I wouldn’t see the Committee cutting rates until we’re confident that inflation is moving down in a sustained way. That would be my test. I don’t see us as having a really clear and precise understanding of what the neutral rate is and what real rates are so that it would mechanically happen like that. It would—really, it’ll be a test of—for cutting rates, I think, in the event, it’ll be a question of, do we actually feel confident that inflation is coming down in a sustained way? Thank you very much.

****FOMCpresconf20230201

. Good afternoon, and welcome. My colleagues and I understand the hardship that high inflation is causing, and we are strongly committed to bringing inflation back down to our 2 percent goal. Over the past year, we have taken forceful actions to tighten the stance of monetary policy. We have covered a lot of ground, and the full effects of our rapid tightening so far are yet to be felt. Even so, we have more work to do. Price stability is the responsibility of the Federal Reserve and serves as the bedrock of our economy. Without price stability, the economy does not work for anyone. In particular, without price stability, we will not achieve a sustained period of labor market conditions that benefit all. Today, the FOMC raised our policy interest rate by 25 basis points. We continue to anticipate that ongoing increases will be appropriate in order to attain a stance of monetary policy that is sufficiently restrictive to return inflation to 2 percent over time. In addition, we are continuing the process of significantly reducing the size of our balance sheet. Restoring price stability will likely require maintaining a restrictive stance for some time. I will have more to say about today’s monetary policy actions after briefly reviewing economic developments. The U.S. economy slowed significantly last year, with real GDP rising at a below trend pace of 1 percent. Recent indicators point to modest growth of spending and production this quarter. Consumer spending appears to be expanding at a subdued pace, in part reflecting tighter financial conditions over the past year. Activity in the housing sector continues to weaken, largely reflecting higher mortgage rates. Higher interest rates and slower output growth also appear to be weighing on business fixed investment. Despite the slowdown in growth, the labor market remains extremely tight, with the unemployment rate at a 50 year low, job vacancies still very high, and wage growth elevated. Job gains have been robust, with employment rising by an average of 247,000 jobs per month over the last three months. Although the pace of job gains has slowed over the course of the past year and nominal wage growth has shown some signs of easing, the labor market continues to be out of balance. Labor demand substantially exceeds the supply of available workers, and the labor force participation rate has changed little from a year ago. Inflation remains well above our longer run goal of 2 percent. Over the 12 months ending in December, total PCE prices rose 5.0 percent  excluding the volatile food and energy categories, core PCE prices rose 4.4 percent. The inflation data received over the past three months show a welcome reduction in the monthly pace of increases. And, while recent developments are encouraging, we will need substantially more evidence to be confident that inflation is on a sustained downward path. Despite elevated inflation, longer term inflation expectations appear to remain well anchored, as reflected in a broad range of surveys of households, businesses, and forecasters, as well as measures from financial markets. But that’s not grounds for complacency. Although inflation has moderated recently, it remains too high. The longer the current bout of high inflation continues, the greater the chance that expectations of higher inflation will become entrenched. The Fed’s monetary policy actions are guided by our mandate to promote maximum employment and stable prices for the American people. My colleagues and I are acutely aware that high inflation imposes significant hardship, as it erodes purchasing power, especially for those least able to meet the higher costs of essentials like food, housing, and transportation. We are highly attentive to the risks that inflation poses to both sides of our mandate, and we are strongly committed to returning inflation to our 2 percent objective. At today’s meeting, the Committee raised the target range for the federal funds rate by 25 basis points, bringing the target range to 4½ to 4¾ percent. And we are continuing the process of significantly reducing the size of our balance sheet. With today’s action, we have raised interest rates by 4½ percentage points over the past year. We continue to anticipate that ongoing increases in the target range for the federal funds rate will be appropriate in order to attain a stance of monetary policy that is sufficiently restrictive to return inflation to 2 percent over time. We are seeing the effects of our policy actions on demand in the most interest sensitive sectors of the economy, particularly housing. It will take time, however, for the full effects of monetary restraint to be realized, especially on inflation. In light of the cumulative tightening of monetary policy and the lags with which monetary policy affects economic activity and inflation, the Committee decided to raise interest rates by 25 basis points today, continuing the step down from last year’s rapid pace of increases. Shifting to a slower pace will better allow the Committee to assess the economy’s progress toward our goals as we determine the extent of future increases that will be required to attain a sufficiently restrictive stance. We will continue to make our decisions meeting by meeting, taking into account the totality of incoming data and their implications for the outlook for economic activity and inflation. We have been taking forceful steps to moderate demand so that it comes into better alignment with supply. Our overarching focus is using our tools to bring inflation back down to our 2 percent goal and to keep longer term inflation expectations well anchored. Reducing inflation is likely to require a period of below trend growth and some softening of labor market conditions. Restoring price stability is essential to set the stage for achieving maximum employment and stable prices over the longer run. The historical record cautions strongly against prematurely loosening policy. We will stay the course, until the job is done. To conclude, we understand that our actions affect communities, families, and businesses across the country. Everything we do is in service to our public mission. We at the Fed will do everything we can to achieve our maximum employment and price stability goals. Thank you, and I look forward to your questions. . So it is important that overall financial conditions continue to reflect the policy restraint that we’re putting in place in order to bring inflation down to 2 percent. And, of course, financial conditions have tightened very significantly over the past year. I would say that our focus is not on short term moves but on sustained changes to broader financial conditions. And it is our judgment that we’re not yet at a sufficiently restrictive policy stance, which is why we say that we expect ongoing hikes will be appropriate. Of course, many things affect financial conditions—not just our policy. And we will take into account overall financial conditions along with many other factors as we set policy. . So I would say it is a good thing that the disinflation that we have seen so far has not come at the expense of a weaker labor market. But I would also say that that disinflationary process that you now see under way is really at an early stage. What you see is, really, in the goods sector you see inflation now coming down because supply chains have been fixed, demand is shifting back to services, and shortages have been abated. So you see that. In the other—in the housing services sector, we expect inflation to continue moving up for a while but then to come down, assuming that [rent increases associated with] new leases continue to be lower. So, in those two sectors, you’ve got a good story. The issue is that we have a large sector called nonhousing service—core nonhousing services, where we don’t see disinflation yet. But I would say that, so far, what we see is progress but without any weakening in labor market conditions. . Go ahead. . No. We’re going to write down new forecasts at the March meeting, and we’ll see at that time. I will say that it is gratifying to see the disinflationary process now getting under way, and we continue to get strong labor market data. So—but, you know, we’ll update those forecasts in March. . So you’re right about the data, of course. What we did see—we’ve seen average hourly earnings and now the employment cost index abating a little bit still off of their highs of six months ago and more but still at levels that are fairly elevated. The job openings number has—in JOLTS, has been quite volatile recently. Yeah, I did see that it moved up—back up this morning. I do think that it’s probably an important indicator. The ratio, I guess, is back up to 1.9 job openings to unemployed people, people who are looking for work. So it’s an indicator, but nonetheless, we—you’re right, we do see wages moving down. If you look across the rest of the labor market, you still see very high payroll job creation. And, you know, quits are still at an elevated level. So many, many—by many, many indicators, the job market is still very strong. . So you’re right. At the December meeting, we all wrote down our best estimates of what we thought the ultimate level would be, and that’s obviously back in December. And the median for that was between 5 and 5¼ percent. At the March meeting, we’re going to update those assessments. We did not update them today. We did, however, continue to say that we believe ongoing rate hikes will be appropriate to attain a sufficiently restrictive stance of policy to bring inflation back down to 2 percent. We think we’ve covered a lot of ground, and financial conditions have certainly tightened. I would say we still think there’s work to do there. We haven’t made a decision on exactly where that will be. I think, you know, we’re going to be looking carefully at the incoming data between now and the March meeting and then the May meeting. I don’t feel a lot of certainty about where that will be. It could certainly be higher than we’re writing down right now. If we come to the view that we need to write down to, you know, to move rates up beyond what we said in December, we would certainly do that. At the same time, if the data come in, in the other direction, then we’ll, you know, we’ll make data dependent decisions at coming meetings, of course. . I guess I would say it this way. I continue to think that it’s very difficult to manage the risk of doing too little and finding out in 6 or 12 months that we actually were close but didn’t get the job done. Inflation springs back, and we have to go back in. And now, you really do worry about expectations getting unanchored and that kind of thing. This is a very difficult risk to manage, whereas I—of course, we have no incentive and no desire to overtighten. But we, you know, if we feel like we’ve gone too far, we can certainly—and inflation is coming down faster than we expect, then we have tools that would work on that. So I do think that, in this situation, where we have still the highest inflation in 40 years, you know, the job is not fully done. As I started to mention earlier, we have a sector that represents 56 percent of the core inflation index where we don’t see disinflation yet. So we don’t see it. It’s not happening yet. Inflation in the core services ex. housing is still running at 4 percent on a 6  and 12 month basis. So there’s not—nothing happening there. In the other two sectors representing, you know, less than 50 percent, you actually, I think, now have a story that is credible, that’s coming together, although you don’t actually see disinflation yet in housing services, but it’s in the pipeline, right? So, for the third sector, we don’t see anything here. So I think it would be premature—it would be very premature to declare victory or to think that we’ve really got this. We need to see—our goal, of course, is to bring inflation down. And how do we get that done? There are many, many factors driving inflation in that sector, and they should be coming into play to have inflation—the disinflationary process begin in that sector. But, so far, we don’t see that. And I think until we do, we see ourselves as having a lot of work left to do. . So I guess I would say it this way. We can now say, I think, for the first time that the disinflationary process has started. We can see that. And we see it, really, in goods prices so far. Goods prices is a big sector. We—this is what we thought would happen since the very beginning, and now here it is actually happening, and for the reasons we thought. We—you know, it’s supply chains, it’s shortages, and it’s demand revolving back towards services. So this is a good thing. This is a good thing. But that’s, you know, around a quarter of the PCE price index—core PCE price index. So the second sector is housing services, and that’s driven by very different things. And we—as I mentioned, with housing services, we expect, and other forecasters expect, that measured inflation will continue moving up for several months but will then come down, assuming that [rent increases associated with] new leases continue to be soft. And we do assume that. So we think that that’s sort of in the pipeline. And we actually see disinflation in the goods sector, and we see it in the pipeline for two sectors that amount to a little less than half. So this is good. And we note that when we say inflation is coming down that this is good. We expect to see that that disinflation process will be seen, we hope soon, in the core goods ex. housing—sorry, the core services ex. housing sector that I talked about. We don’t see it yet. It’s—you know, it’s seven or eight different kinds of services, not all of them are the same. And, you know, we have a sense of what’s going on in each of those different subsections. Probably the biggest part of it, probably 60 percent of that is, you know, research would show is sensitive to slack in the economy and so the labor market will probably be important. Some of the other ones it’s—the labor market is not going to be important. Many other factors will drive it. In any case, we don’t see disinflation in that sector yet. And I think we need to see that it’s the majority of the core PCE index, which is the thing that we think is the best predictor of headline PCE, which is [the price series that we associate with] our mandate. So it’s not that we’re not—we’re neither optimistic nor pessimistic. We’re just telling you that we don’t see inflation moving down yet in that large sector. I think we will fairly soon, but we don’t see it yet. Until we do, I think we—you know, we see ourselves, we’ve got to be honest with ourselves, but we see ourselves as having perhaps more persistent—we’ll see more persistent inflation in that sector, which will take longer to get down. And we’re just going to have to—we have to complete the job. You know, that’s what we’re here for. . So we’ve—you know, we’ve raised rates 4½ percentage points, and we’re talking about a couple of more rate hikes to get to that level we think is appropriately restrictive. And why do we think that’s probably necessary? We think, because inflation is still running very hot. We’re, of course, taking into account long and variable lags, and we’re thinking about that. It really—the story we’re telling about inflation is to ourselves, and the way we understand it is basically the three things that I’ve just gone through a couple of times. And, again, we don’t see it affecting the services sector ex. housing yet. But, I mean, I think our assessment is that we’re not very far from that level. We don’t know that, though. We don’t know that. So I think we’re—you know, we’re living in a world of significant uncertainty. I would look across the rate—the spectrum of rates and see that real rates are now positive by— you know, by an appropriate set of measures are positive across the yield curve. I think policy is restrictive. We’re trying to make a fine judgment about how much is restrictive enough. That’s all. And we’re going to—you know, that’s why we’re slowing down to 25 basis points. We’re going to be carefully watching the economy and watching inflation and watching the progress of the disinflationary process. . We—you know, you’ll see that the minutes will come out in three weeks, and we’ll give you a lot of detail. I—you know, we spend a lot of time talking about the path ahead and the state of the economy. And I wouldn’t want to start to drive the—describe all the details there, but that was the sense of the discussion, was really talking quite a bit about the path forward. . So your question is, would we—say your question again. . So you’re really asking about—you’re asking about prioritization, in effect, is what— . Okay. So I feel like I have to say this. There’s only one way forward here, and that is for Congress to raise the debt ceiling so that the United States government can pay all of its obligations when due. And any deviations from that path would be highly risky and that no one should assume that the Fed can protect the economy from the consequences of failing to act in a timely manner. In terms of our relationship with the Treasury, we are their fiscal agent. And I’m just going to leave it at that. . I’m just going to leave it at that. This is a matter that’s to be resolved between, really—it’s really Congress’ job to raise the debt ceiling. And I gather there are discussions happening, but they don’t involve us. We’re not involved in those discussions. So we’re the fiscal agent. . So the Committee obviously did not see this as the time to pause. We judged that the appropriate, you know, thing to do at this meeting was to raise the federal funds rate by 25 basis points. And we said that we continue to anticipate that ongoing increases in the target range will be appropriate in order to attain that stance of sufficiently restrictive monetary policy that will bring inflation down to 2 percent. So that’s the judgment that we made. You know, we’re going to write down new forecasts in March, and we’ll—you know, we’ll certainly be looking at the incoming data as everyone else will. . I mean, I think this is not something that the Committee is thinking about or exploring in any kind of detail. In principle, though, you know, we used to—the thing we used to do was go every other meeting, if you remember, 25 basis points, and that was considered a fast pace. So I think a lot of options are available. And I mean, you saw what the Bank of Canada did and, you know, they left it that they’re willing to raise rates after pausing. But this is not something that the Federal Open Market Committee is on the point of deciding right now. . So a couple of things. First, on the forecast, if—you’re right—if you take very short term three month, say, measures of PCE—core PCE inflation, they’re quite low right now. But that’s because that’s driven by, you know, significantly negative readings from goods inflation. Most forecasters would think that the significantly negative readings will be transitory and that goods inflation will move up fairly soon, back up to its longer run trend of something around zero, something like that. So a lot of forecasts would call for core PCE to go back up to 4 percent by the middle of the year, for example. So that’s really where the sustainable level is. It’s more like at 4 percent. So that would suggest there’s work left to do. You know, let’s say inflation does come down much faster than we expect, which is possible. As I mentioned, you know, obviously our policy is data dependent. We would take that into account. In terms of the non—sorry, the core nonhousing services, as I mentioned earlier, it’s a very diverse sector, six or seven sectors. And so sectors that represent 55 or 60 percent of that— subsectors of that sector are—we think are sensitive to slack in the economy, sensitive to the labor market in a way, but some of the other sectors are not. And, for example, you know, financial services is a big sector that’s really not driven by labor markets—wages. So that’s why I said there are a number of things that will affect—take restaurants, right? So, clearly, labor is important for restaurants but so are food prices. And, you know, transportation services is going to be driven by fuel prices, for example. So there are lots of things in that mix that will drive inflation. I would say overall, though, my own view would be that you’re not going to have, you know, a sustainable return to 2 percent inflation in that sector without a better balance in the labor market. And I don’t know what that will require in terms of increased unemployment, your question. I do think there are a number of dimensions through which the labor market can soften. And so far, we’ve got—as I mentioned, in goods, we have inflation moving down without the softening in the labor market. I think most forecasters would say that unemployment will probably rise a bit from here. But I still think—I continue to think that there’s a path to getting inflation back down to 2 percent without a really significant economic decline or a significant increase in unemployment. And that’s because the—you know, the setting we’re in is quite different. The inflation that we originally got was very much a collision between very strong demand and hard supply constraints, not something that you really have seen in prior— you know, in prior business cycles. And so now we see goods inflation coming down for the reasons we thought, and we understand why housing inflation will come down. And I think will—a story will emerge on the nonhousing services sector soon enough. But I think there is— there’s ongoing disinflation, and we don’t yet see weakening in the labor market. So we’ll have to see. . Certainly possible. Yeah. Absolutely it’s possible. You know, it’s a question—no one really knows. I think it’s because this is not like the other business cycles in so many ways. It may well be that as—yeah, as—that it will take more slowing than we expect—than I expect to get inflation down to 2 percent. But I don’t—that’s not my base case. My base case is that the economy can return to 2 percent inflation without a really significant downturn or a really big increase in unemployment. I think that’s a possible outcome. I think many, many forecasters would say it’s not the most likely outcome. But I would say there’s a chance of it. . So I do think you—most forecasts and, you know, my own assessment would be that that growth will continue—positive growth will continue but at a subdued pace as it did last year. We had growth of—GDP growth of 1 percent last year and also final sales growth, which we think is a better indicator, of about 1 percent. I think, you know, most forecasts and certainly my assessment would be that growth will continue at a fairly subdued level this year. There are other factors, though, that need to be considered. You will have seen that the global picture is improving a bit, and that will matter for us, potentially. The labor market remains very, very strong, and that’s job creation, that’s wages. As inflation does come down, sentiment will improve. You also—state and local governments are really flush these days with, you know, money, and many of them are considering tax cuts or even sending checks. So I think that’s going to support—they’re also spending a lot. There’s a lot of spending coming in the construction pipeline, both private and public. And so that’s going to support economic activity. So I think there’s a good chance that those factors will help support positive growth this year. And that’s my base case, is that there will be positive growth this year. . Fine. Thanks. Fine. . So I don’t think there’s, you know, going to be a light switch flipped or anything like that. I think it’s just an accumulating—accumulation of evidence. So, of course, we’ll be looking—by the time of the March meeting, we’ll have two more employment reports, two more CPI reports, and we’ll be looking at those carefully as all of us will. And we’ll be asking ourselves, what are they telling us? And soon after that, we’ll have another ECI wage report, which, as you know, is a report that we like because it adjusts for composition and it’s very complete. And, you know, the one we got, I guess it was yesterday, was some—was constructive. It’s—you know, it shows wages coming down but still at a high level. They’re still at a level that’s way above—well above where they were before the pandemic. So I don’t want to put a number on it in terms of months, but as the accumulated evidence comes in, it’s going to be reflected in our assessment of the outlook, and that will be reflected in our policy over time. But I will say, though, we—you know, it is our job to restore price stability and achieve 2 percent inflation for the benefit of the American public. We’re not—market participants have a very different job. It’s a fine job. It’s a great job. In fact, I did that job for years but in one form or another. But, you know, we have to deliver that. And so we are strongly resolved that we will, you know, complete this task because we think it has benefits that will, you know, support economic activity and benefit the public for many, many years. . I don’t think we know, honestly. You know, the—so we, of course, expected goods inflation to start coming down by the end of 2021, and it didn’t come down all through ’22. And now it’s coming down, and it’s come down pretty fast. So I would say these are—this is not a standard business cycle where you can look at the last 10 times there was a global pandemic and we shut the economy down and Congress did what it did and we did what we did. It’s just—it’s unique. So I think certainty is just not appropriate here. Inflation—it’s just harder to forecast inflation. It may come down faster. It may take longer to come down. And, you know, our job is to deliver inflation back to target, and we will do that. But I think we’re going to be cautious about declaring victory and, you know, sending signals that we think that the game is won because, you know, it’s—we’ve got a long way to go. It’s just—it’s the early stages of disinflation. And it’s most welcome to be able to say that we are now in disinflation, but that’s great. But we just see that it has to spread through the economy and that it’s going to take some time. That’s all. . You know, so—again, my forecast and that of my colleagues as you will see from the SEP and—I mean, there are many different forecasts, but, generally, it’s a forecast of slower growth, some softening in labor market conditions, and inflation moving down steadily but not quickly. And, in that case, if the economy performs broadly in line with those expectations, it will not be appropriate to cut rates this year, to loosen policy this year. Of course, other people have forecasts with inflation coming down much faster, that’s a different thing. You know, if that happens—inflation comes down much faster, you know, then we’ll be seeing that, and it will be incorporated into our thinking about policy. . I’m not particularly concerned about the divergence, no, because it is largely due to the market’s expectation that inflation will move down more quickly. I think that’s the bigger part of that. So, again, as I just mentioned, we—you know, our forecasts— different participants have different forecasts, but, generally, those forecasts are for continued subdued growth, some softening in the labor market but not a recession, not a recession. And we have inflation moving down, you know, into the—somewhere in the mid threes or maybe lower than that this year. We’ll update that in March, but that’s what we thought in December. Markets are past that. They show inflation coming down, in some cases, much quicker than that. So we’ll just have to see. And we have a different view and—a different view, it’s a different forecast, really. And given our outlook, I just—I don’t see us cutting rates this year if we get—if our outlook turns true, as I mentioned just now. If we do see inflation coming down much more quickly, that’ll play into our policy setting, of course. . That’s the general sense of it. Look, we understand—I personally understand well that COVID is still out there, but that it’s no longer playing an important role in our economy. And, you know, we’ve kept that statement in there for quite a while, and I think we just—we knew we would take it out at some point. There’s never a perfect time, but we thought that—you know, people are handling it better, and the economy and the society are handling it better now. It doesn’t really need to be in a—you know, in the Fed’s monthly, you know, postmeeting statement as an ongoing economic risk as opposed to, you know, a health issue. . I do. Yeah, I do. You don’t see that yet. But the whole point is, you know, if you—once you see it, you have a serious problem. That means that, effectively, in people’s decisionmaking, inflation has become a really salient issue. And once that happens— that’s what we can’t allow to happen. And, you know, so that’s why we worry that the longer we’re at this and the longer people are talking about inflation all day long, every day, you know, the more risk of something like that. But no, there’s not much—it’s more of a risk. It always has been more of a risk than anything else. By the way, I think it’s becoming less salient. And people are—you know, we pick that up in conversations. And I’ve seen some data, too, that show people are, you know, gradually—they’re glad that inflation is coming down. People really don’t like inflation. And as we see it coming down, that could also add a boost to economic activity. You look at the sentiment surveys now, and they’re very, very low with 3½ percent unemployment and, you know, high wage increases nominally by historical standards. Why can that be? It has to be inflation, right? So I think once inflation is seen to be coming down in coming months, even you will also see a boost to sentiment, I hope. . That’s at the very heart, is consumers and businesses that, you know, are the—essentially, we believe that expectations of future inflation are a very important part of the process of creating inflation. That’s a sort of bedrock belief. In one way or another, it has to be. We think it’s important. And, in this case, I would say, the risk eight months ago or so, longer term inflation expectations had moved up. We moved quite vigorously last year. Expectations are—seem to be well anchored, including at the shorter end now, not just the longer end. So it’s, you know—and that’s—I think that’s very reassuring. I think, you know, the markets have decided, and the public has decided, that inflation is going to come back down to 2 percent and it’s just a matter of us following through. That's immeasurably helpful to the process of getting inflation down. The fact that people now do generally believe that it will come down, that’ll be part of the process of getting it down. And it’s a very positive thing. . I would put it this way. It’s something that we monitor carefully. Financial conditions didn’t really change much from the December meeting to now. They mostly went sideways or up and down but came out in roughly the same place. It’s important that the markets do reflect the tightening that we’re putting in place. As we’ve discussed a couple times here, there’s a difference in perspective by some market measures on how fast inflation will come down. We’re just going to have to see. I mean, I’m not going to try to persuade people to have a different forecast, but our forecast is that it will take some time and some patience and that we’ll need to keep rates higher for longer. But we’ll see. . Look, I—it’s very hard to think about all the different possible ramifications. And I think the answer is, basically, I don’t think there’s likely to be any important interaction between the two, because I believe Congress will wind up acting, and—as it will and must, in the end, to raise the debt ceiling in a way that doesn’t risk, you know, the progress we’re making against inflation and the economy and the financial sector. I believe that that will happen. I believe it will happen. You know, we, of course, will monitor money market conditions carefully as—you know, as the process moves on. For example, the Treasury General Account will shrink down, and then it will grow back up. And we understand there’ll be lots of flows between there and the overnight repo facility and reserves. We understand all that. We’re watching it carefully. We’ll just be monitoring it. Thank you very much.

****FOMCpresconf20230322

. Good afternoon. Before discussing today’s meeting, let me briefly address recent developments in the banking sector. In the past two weeks, serious difficulties at a small number of banks have emerged. History has shown that isolated banking problems, if left unaddressed, can undermine confidence in healthy banks and threaten the ability of the banking system as a whole to play its vital role in supporting the savings and credit needs of households and businesses. That is why, in response to these events, the Federal Reserve, working with the Treasury Department and the FDIC, took decisive actions to protect the U.S. economy and to strengthen public confidence in our banking system. These actions demonstrate that all depositors’ savings and the banking system are safe. With the support of the Treasury, the Federal Reserve Board created the Bank Term Funding Program to ensure that banks that hold safe and liquid assets can, if needed, borrow reserves against those assets at par. This program, along with our long standing discount window, is effectively meeting the unusual funding needs that some banks have faced and makes clear that ample liquidity in the system is available. Our banking system is sound and resilient, with strong capital and liquidity. We will continue to closely monitor conditions in the banking system and are prepared to use all of our tools as needed to keep it safe and sound. In addition, we are committed to learning the lessons from this episode and to work to prevent episodes—events like this from happening again. Turning to the broader economy and monetary policy: Inflation remains too high, and the labor market continues to be very tight. My colleagues and I understand the hardship that high inflation is causing, and we remain strongly committed to bringing inflation back down to our 2 percent goal. Price stability is the responsibility of the Federal Reserve. Without price stability, the economy does not work for anyone. In particular, without price stability, we will not achieve a sustained period of long—of strong labor market conditions that benefit all. The U.S. economy slowed significantly last year, with real GDP rising at a below trend pace of 0.9 percent. Consumer spending appears to have picked up this quarter, although some of that strength may reflect the effects of swings in the weather across the turn of the year. In contrast, activity in the housing sector remains weak, largely reflecting higher mortgage rates. Higher interest rates and slower output growth also appear to be weighing on business fixed investment. Committee participants generally expect subdued growth to continue. As shown in our Summary of Economic Projections, the median projection for real GDP growth stands at just 0.4 percent this year and 1.2 percent next year, well below the median estimate of the longer run normal growth rate. And nearly all participants see the risks to GDP growth as weighted to the downside. Yet the labor market remains extremely tight. Job gains have picked up in recent months, with employment rising by an average of 351,000 jobs per month over the last three months. The unemployment rate remained low in February at 3.6 percent. The labor force participation rate has edged up in recent months, and wage growth has shown some signs of easing. However, with job vacancies still very high, labor demand substantially exceeds the supply of available workers. FOMC participants expect supply and demand conditions in the labor market to come into better balance over time, easing upward pressures on wages and prices. The median unemployment rate projection in the SEP rises to 4.5 percent at the end of this year and 4.6 percent at the end of next year. Inflation remains well above our longer run goal of 2 percent. Over the 12 months ending in January, total PCE prices rose 5.4 percent  excluding the volatile food and energy categories. Core PCE—excluding those, core PCE prices rose 4.7 percent. In February, the 12 month change in the CPI came in at 6 percent, and the change in the core CPI was 5.5 percent. Inflation has moderated somewhat since the middle of last year, but the strength of these recent readings indicates that inflation pressures continue to run high. The median projection in the SEP for total PCE inflation is 3.3 percent for this year, 2.5 percent next year, and 2.1 percent in 2025. The process of getting inflation back down to 2 percent has a long way to go and is likely to be bumpy. Despite elevated inflation, longer term inflation expectations appear to remain well anchored, as reflected in a broad range of surveys of households, businesses, and forecasters, as well as measures from financial markets. The Fed’s monetary policy actions are guided by our mandate to promote maximum employment and stable prices for the American people. My colleagues and I are acutely aware that high inflation imposes significant hardship, as it erodes purchasing power, especially for those least able to meet the higher costs of essentials like food, housing, and transportation. We are highly attentive to the risks that high inflation poses to both sides of our mandate, and we are strongly committed to returning inflation to our 2 percent objective. At today’s meeting, the Committee raised the target range for the federal funds rate by ¼ percentage point, bringing the target range to 4¾ to 5 percent. And we are continuing the process of significantly reducing our securities holdings. Since our previous FOMC meeting, economic indicators have generally come in stronger than expected, demonstrating greater momentum in economic activity and inflation. We believe, however, that events in the banking system over the past two weeks are likely to result in tighter credit conditions for households and businesses, which would in turn affect economic outcomes. It is too soon to determine the extent of these effects and therefore too soon to tell how monetary policy should respond. As a result, we no longer state that we anticipate that ongoing rate increases will be appropriate to quell inflation  instead, we now anticipate that some additional policy firming may be appropriate. We will closely monitor incoming data and carefully assess the actual and expected effects of tighter credit conditions on economic activity, the labor market, and inflation, and our policy decisions will reflect that assessment. In our SEP, each FOMC participant wrote down an appropriate path for the federal funds rate based on what that participant judges to be the most likely scenario going forward. If the economy evolves as projected, the median participant projects that the appropriate level of the federal funds rate will be 5.1 percent at the end of this year, 4.3 percent at the end of 2024, and 3.1 percent at the end of 2025. These are little changed from our December projections, reflecting offsetting factors. These projections are not a Committee decision or plan  if the economy does not evolve as projected, the path for policy will adjust as appropriate to foster our maximum employment and price stability goals. We will continue to make our meeting— decisions meeting by meeting, based on the totality of the vincoming data and their implications for the outlook for economic activity and inflation. We remain committed to bringing inflation back down to our 2 percent goal and to keep longer term inflation expectations well anchored. Reducing inflation is likely to require a period of below trend growth and some softening in labor market conditions. Restoring price stability is essential to set the stage for achieving maximum employment and stable prices over the longer run. To conclude, we understand that our actions affect communities, families, and businesses across the country. Everything we do is in service to our public mission. We at the Fed will do everything we can to achieve our maximum employment and price stability goals. Thank you. I look forward to your questions. . Thanks. So I, I guess our view is that the banking system is sound and it’s resilient—it’s got strong capital [and] liquidity. We took powerful actions with [the] Treasury and the FDIC, which demonstrate that all depositors’ savings are safe and that the banking system is safe. Deposit flows in the banking system have stabilized over the last week. And the last thing I’ll say is that we’ve undertaken—we’re undertaking a thorough internal review that will identify where we can strengthen supervision and regulation. . So we considered—we did consider that in the days running up to the meeting, and you see the decision that we made, which I’ll say a couple things about. First, it was supported by a very strong consensus, and I’ll be happy to explain why. And, really, it is that the intermeeting data on inflation and the labor market came in stronger than expected and, really, before the recent events, we were clearly on track to continue with ongoing rate hikes. In fact, as of a couple of weeks ago, it looked like we’d need to raise rates over the course of the year more than we had expected at the time of the SEP in December—at the time of the December meeting. We are committed to restoring price stability, and all of the evidence says that the public has confidence that we will do so—that we’ll bring inflation down to 2 percent over time. It is important that we sustain that confidence with our actions as well as our words. So we also assess, as I mentioned, that the events of the last two weeks are likely to result in some tightening credit conditions for households and businesses and thereby weigh on demand, on the labor market, and on inflation. Such a tightening in financial conditions would work in the same direction as rate tightening. In principle, as a matter of fact, you can think of it as being the equivalent of a rate hike or perhaps more than that  of course, it’s not possible to make that assessment today with any precision whatsoever. So our decision was to move ahead with the 25 basis point hike and to change our guidance, as I mentioned, from ongoing hikes to some, some additional hikes maybe—some policy firming may be appropriate. So going forward, as I mentioned, in assessing the need for, for further hikes, we’ll be focused as always on the incoming data and the evolving outlook and, in particular, on our assessment of the actual and expected effects of credit tightening. . No, I think it’s, it’s meant to refer to our policy rate. Really, I would focus on, on the words “may” and “some,” as opposed to “ongoing.” Ongoing. So we, we clearly were—what we were doing there was taking onboard the—trying to reflect the uncertainty about what will happen. I mean, it, it’s possible that this will turn out to have very modest effects—that these events will turn out to be very, very modest effects on the economy, in which case inflation will continue to be strong—in which case, you know, the path will look— might look different. It’s also possible that this potential tightening will contribute significant tightening in credit conditions over time and, in principle, if that—that means that monetary policy may have less work to do. We simply don’t know. So. . No. I mean, with our monetary policy, we’re, we’re really focused on macroeconomic outcomes. In particular, we’re focused on, on this potential credit tightening and what can that produce in the way of tighter credit conditions. I think when we think about the situation with the banks, we’re focused on our—on our financial stability tools, in particular our lending facilities, the debt—sorry, the discount window, and also the new facility. . So, you know, we have just come from an FOMC meeting and, you know, the people who write the minutes will be very carefully counting, but I’ll tell you what I heard. What I heard was significant number of people saying that they anticipated there would be some, some tightening of credit conditions and that would really have the same effects as, as our policies do, and that therefore they were including that in their assessment and that if that did turn out not to be the case, in principle you would need more rate hikes. So some people did reflect that in their FOMC—in their SEP forecasts. I think there may also just have been— remember, this is 12 days ago. You know, we’re trying to assess something that just is so recent and it’s people—you know, it’s very difficult, there’s so much uncertainty. So December was a good place to start, and we wound up with—we wound up with very similar outcomes for December. And, you know, in a way, the early—the data in the first part—the first five weeks of the intermeeting period pointed to stronger inflation and stronger labor markets. So that pointed to higher rates. And then this, this latter part kind of—the possibility of credit conditions tightening really, really offset that, effectively. . You know, we know that we have other, other tools in effect, but no, we think our monetary policy tool works, and we think, you know, many, many banks—our rate hikes were well telegraphed to the market, and many banks have managed to handle them. . The issue was really not about those specific banks, but about the risk of a contagion to, to other banks and to the financial markets more broadly. That was the issue. . So Vice Chair Barr is, is of course leading that review. And he’s responsible for it in his capacity as Vice Chair for Supervision. We—I realized, you know, right away that, that there was going to be a need for review. I mean, the question we’re all asking ourselves over that first weekend was, how did this happen? And so what we did was, early Monday morning, we sat down and said, “Let’s do this.” And he, he was obviously going to lead it in his capacity. So I don’t—my role was to announce it, and I get briefed on it, but I’m not involved in, in the work of it. . Yes. I mean, what actually happened, Howard, was I got the question 12 times, so it’s—maybe it’s a feature, not a bug. But, so, but yeah, absolutely the same—the story is intact, so it’s really three parts, right? Goods inflation has been coming down now for six months  it’s proceeding more slowly than we would have liked, but it’s certainly proceeding. Housing services is, is really a matter of time passing. We continue to see the new leases being signed at much lower levels of inflation. So that’s 44 percent of the—of the core PCE index, where you’ve got a story that’s ongoing. Where we didn’t have in February, and we still don’t have now, is a sign of progress in the nonhousing services sector. And that is, you know, that’s just something that will have to come through softening demand and perhaps some softening in labor market conditions. We don’t see that yet. And that’s, that’s of course 56 percent of the index. So the story is pretty much the same. I will say that the inflation data that we got, to your point, really pointed to stronger inflation. . So it’s really just a question of not knowing at this point. There’s a great deal of literature on the connection between tighter credit conditions, economic activity, hiring, and inflation. Very large body of literature. The question is, how significant will this credit tightening be and how sustainable it will be? That’s, that’s the issue. And we don’t really see it yet, so, so people are making estimates, you know, people are publishing estimates, but it’s very kind of rule of thumb guesswork almost at this point. But we think it’s, it’s potentially quite real and that argues for, you know, being alert as we go forward. As we think about further rate hikes for us, we’ll be paying attention to the actual and expected effects from that. . So let me say what, what I think happened, and then I’ll come to the questions around supervision. So, at a basic level, Silicon Valley Bank management failed badly—they grew the bank very quickly, they exposed the bank to significant liquidity risk and interest rate risk, didn’t hedge that risk. We now know that supervisors saw these risks and, and intervened. We know that the public saw all this. We know that SVB experienced an unprecedentedly rapid and massive bank run. So this is a—this is a very large group of connected depositors—concentrated group of connected depositors in a very, very fast run, faster than historical record would suggest. So as for us—so for our part, we’re doing a review of supervision and regulation. My only interest is that we identify what went wrong here. How did this happen is the question. What went wrong? Try to find that. We will find that. And then make an assessment of what are the right policies to put in place so that it doesn’t happen again, and then implement those policies. It would be inappropriate for me at this stage to offer my views on what the answers might be. You know, I simply can’t do that. Vice Chair Barr is leading this, and I think he’s testifying next week. So—but that will be up to him. So that’s really where it is. You know, the, the review is going to be thorough and transparent. It is clear—really to your last question—it’s clear that we do need to strengthen supervision and regulation. And I, I assume that there will be recommendations coming out of the report, and I, I plan on supporting them and supporting their implementation. . These are not weaknesses that are—that are at all broadly through the banking system. This was—this was a bank that was an outlier in terms of both its percentage of, of uninsured deposits and in terms of its holdings of duration risk. And again, supervisors did get in there, and, and they were, as you know, obviously, you know they were— they were on this issue, but nonetheless, this, this still happened. And so that’s really the nature of the interview—sorry, of the review—is to discover that. . So we published an SEP today, as you will have seen, and it shows that basically participants expect relatively slow growth, a gradual rebalancing of supply and demand in the labor market, with inflation moving down gradually. In that most likely case, if that happens, participants don’t see rate cuts this year. They just don’t. I would just say: As always, the path of the economy is uncertain, and policy is going to reflect what actually happens rather than what we write down in the SEP. But that’s not our baseline expectation. . It’s going to depend. Remember, we’re looking—for purposes of our monetary policy tool, we’re looking at what’s happening among the banks and asking, is there going to be some tightening in credit conditions? And then we’re thinking about that as effectively doing the same thing that rate hikes do. So, in a way, that substitutes for rate hikes. So, the key is, we have to have—policy has got to be tight enough to bring inflation down to 2 percent over time. It doesn’t all have to come from rate hikes: It can come from, you know, from tighter credit conditions. So we’re looking at, and we, we—it’s highly uncertain how long the situation will be sustained or how significant any of those effects would be, so we’re just going to have to watch. In the meantime, you know—obviously, at the end of the day, we will do enough to bring inflation down to 2 percent. No one should doubt that. . So, you know, we’re well aware of the concentrations people have in commercial real estate. I really don’t think it’s comparable to this. The, the banking system is, is strong, it is sound, it is resilient, it’s well capitalized, and I really don’t see that as at all analogous to this. . I welcome—it’s 100 percent certainty that there will be independent investigations and outside investigations and all that. So we welcome—when a bank fails, there are investigations. And, of course, we welcome that. . We don’t assume that. We don’t give advice to the fiscal authorities, and we assume that—we take fiscal policy as, as it comes to our front door, stick it in our model along with a million other things. We have responsibility for price stability. The Federal Reserve has responsibility for that. And nothing’s going to change that. So—and we will get inflation down to 2 percent in time. . You have to look at, at the impulse from spending because spending was, of course, tremendously high during the pandemic, and then, as the pandemic programs rolled off, spending actually came down, so the—this sort of fiscal impulse is actually not what’s driving inflation right now. It was—it was at the beginning perhaps part of what was driving inflation, but that’s not really the story now. . Sure. So 13(3) seemed like the right—we have a little more flexibility under section 13(3). We’ve done quite a lot under the discount window as well. We needed to do a special facility that was designed a certain way, so we did it under 13(3). Really no magic to that. It’s only available in unusual and exigent circumstances, and it has to be— meet certain requirements, but it seemed to be the right place. So with the FDIC, we’re just, we’re lending to the, in effect, we’re—we’re lending to the bridge bank. So that’s where the funds came from, and it’s—it’s a loan that’s 100 percent guaranteed by the FDIC, so there’s no risk in it for us. . No, absolutely not. No, we, if we need to raise hike—raise rates higher, we will. I think for now though we, we—as I’ve mentioned, we see the likelihood of, of credit tightening. We know that can have, you know, an effect on the macroeconomy, on demand, on labor market, on inflation, and we’re—we’re going to be watching to see what that is. And we’ll also be watching what’s happening with inflation and in the labor market. So we’ll be watching all those things, and of course we will—we will eventually get to [a] tight enough policy to bring inflation down to 2 percent. We’ll find ourselves at that place. . So—People think of QE and QT in different ways, so let me be clear about how I’m thinking about these recent developments. So the recent liquidity provision that has increased the size of our balance sheet but the intent and the effects of it are very different from what we—from when we expand our balance sheet through purchases of longer term securities. Large scale purchases of long term securities are, are really meant to alter the stance of policy by pushing down—pushing up the price and down the rates, longer term rates, which supports demand through channels we understand fairly well. The balance sheet expansion is really temporary lending to banks to meet those special liquidity demands created by the recent tensions  it’s not intended to directly alter the stance of monetary policy. We do believe that it’s working. It’s having its intended effect of bolstering confidence in the banking system and thereby forestalling what might otherwise have been an abrupt and outsized tightening in financial conditions. So that’s working. In terms of the distribution of reserves, we, we don’t see ourselves as, as running into reserve shortages. We, we think that our program of allowing our balance sheet to, to run off predictably, predicatbly and passively is working. And of course we’re, we’re always prepared to, to change that if that changes. But we don’t see any evidence that that’s changed. . I mean, to be honest, I don’t—I don’t recall the specifics of that. It’s been quite an interesting seven weeks. But, but I will tell you, though, that we have—there have been presentations about, about interest rate risk. I mean, it’s been in all the newspapers. It’s not a surprise that there are institutions that have—that have had unhedged long positions in long  duration securities that have lost value as, as longer term rates have gone up due to our rate increases. So that’s, that’s not a surprise. I, I think, as you know, as is now in the public record, the supervisory team was apparently engaged, very much engaged with the bank repeatedly, and was escalating but, you know, nonetheless, what happened happened. And so that’s really the purpose of—one way to think about the review that Vice Chair Barr is conducting is to try to understand how that happened and try to understand how we can do better and what policies we need to change. I mean, one thing is the speed of the—I’ll come back to that, the speed of the run, it’s very different from what we’ve seen in the past, and it does kind of suggest that there’s a need for possible, you know, regulatory and supervisory changes just because supervision and regulation need to keep up with what’s, what’s happening in the world. . I will have to come back to you on that. Yeah, I don’t know. . Well, I’m not saying anything more than I’m saying. So—but what I’m saying is you’ve seen that we have the tools to protect depositors when there’s a threat of serious harm to the economy or to—or to the financial system, and we’re prepared to use those tools. And I think depositors should assume that their—that their deposits are safe. . Sure. So, you know, we—that was really the Swiss government that we of course were, were following it over the course of the weekend, and we were engaged with their authorities in the way that you would expect, all the ways that you would expect. It seems to have been a positive outcome in the sense that the transaction was agreed to, and it has been— the markets have accepted it, and it seems to have gone well, and I think there was a concern that it might not go well. So coming into the middle of this week, yes, I would say that that is going well so far. . So that’s just—that’s an estimate of what will happen as demand slows and as conditions soften in the labor market and it’s just—it’s a highly uncertain estimate. And, I mean, I was really—we have to bring inflation down to 2 percent. The costs of bringing it down—there are real costs to bringing it down to 2 percent, but the costs of failing are much higher. And if you read your history, as I’m sure you have, you can see that if the central bank doesn’t get inflation back in place, get inflation—make sure that inflation expectations remain anchored, you can have a long series of years where inflation is high and volatile, and it’s hard to invest capital, it’s hard for an economy to perform well. And we’re looking to avoid that and, you know, to get back to where we need to be—back to where we were for a quarter century, and get there as quickly as we can. . Well, it depends on whether you—so recessions tend to be nonlinear, and so they’re very hard to model. You know, the models all work in a kind of linear way—if you have more of this, you get more of that. But when a recession happens, the reactions tend to be nonlinear and that’s what—so we don’t know whether that’ll happen this time. We don’t know—if so, we don’t know how significant it will be, and so, you know, we’re very focused on getting inflation down because we know in the longer run that that is the thing that will most benefit the people we serve. That’s how we can have a long—you know, we’ve had very strong labor markets through these long expansions that we’ve had. Four of the five longest, or three of the four longest expansions in U.S. history have been really since the high inflation period. And the reason was inflation wasn’t forcing the central bank to come in and stop an incipient or, or, you know, an expansion. You can have very, very long expansions without high inflation, and we had several of those, and they’re very good for people. You see late in an expansion—you see low unemployment, you see the benefits of wages going to people at the lower end of the wage spectrum. It’s just a place that we should try to get back to. . You know it’s, it’s too early to say, really, whether these events have had much of an effect. It’s hard for me to see how they would have helped the possibility—but I guess I would just say, it’s too early to say whether there really have been changes in that. You know, the question will be how long this period is sustained. The longer it’s sustained, then the greater will be the likely declines in—or tightening in credit standards, credit availability, so we’ll just have to see. I do still think, though, that there’s a—there’s a pathway to that. I think that pathway still exists and, you know, we’re certainly trying to find it. . How many? I don’t know. But those are serious—those are serious regulatory, in particular immediate attention, and that’s—and I guess there were six of them. So. . That is a great question and is right in the heart of what the review will be doing under Vice Chair Barr’s leadership. So that’s, I think that’s where—that’s what you think about. What can we do to make sure that—but, again, that’s not for me to answer today. . Well I, I—see, if I did, I wouldn’t share them because I, I really, you know, this review is going on, and, you know, I want nothing other than us to find out what happened and why, figure out what we can do to do better, and then implement those changes. That’s all I want. It’s—For me to be giving you my half formed, or partially informed, thoughts, it, you know, just isn’t appropriate. There’s a real serious review going on with, with people from all over the Federal Reserve System who are not connected to this, you know, to this work, not connected to this bank, and under, again, Vice Chair Barr’s leadership, and I’m confident that it will produce a satisfactory result. . So we haven’t really talked about changing the balance sheet implementation—that’s not something we’ve discussed yet. As I mentioned, we’re always willing to change that if we conclude that it’s appropriate, but we’re really not seeing any signs there. Sorry, then the question before that was, just give me a— . So financial conditions seem to have tightened—and probably by more than the traditional indexes say, because traditional indexes are focused a lot on [interest] rates and [prices of] equities, and they don’t necessarily capture lending conditions. So we think that, though. So there are other measures which, if they’re focused on, you know—bank lending conditions and things like that—they show some more tightening. The question for us, though, is, how significant will that be and how, you know—what will be the extent of it and what will be the duration of it? And then—and then, you know, once you have—once you know that, there’s a fair amount of research about how that, with broad uncertainty bands—how that works its way into the economy [and] over what period of time. And so, you know, we’ll be looking to see the first part of that—like how serious is this, and does it look like it’s going to be sustained, and if it is, you know, it could easily have a significant macroeconomic effect, and we would factor that into our policy decisions. I mentioned with rate cuts, rate cuts are not in our base case, and, you know, so that’s all I have to say. Thank you very much.

****FOMCpresconf20230503

. Good afternoon. Before discussing today’s meeting, let me comment briefly on recent developments in the banking sector. Conditions in that sector have broadly improved since early March, and the U.S banking system is sound and resilient. We will continue to monitor conditions in the sector. We are committed to learning the right lessons from this episode and will work to prevent events like these from happening again. As a first step in that process, last week we released Vice Chair for Supervision Barr’s Review of the Federal Reserve’s Supervision and Regulation of Silicon Valley Bank. The review’s findings underscore the need to address our rules and supervisory practices to make for a stronger and more resilient banking system, and I am confident that we will do so. From the perspective of monetary policy, our focus remains squarely on our dual mandate to promote maximum employment and stable prices for the American people. My colleagues and I understand the hardship that high inflation is causing, and we remain strongly committed to bringing inflation back down to our 2 percent goal. Price stability is the responsibility of the Federal Reserve. Without price stability, the economy does not work for anyone. In particular, without price stability, we will not achieve a sustained period of strong labor market conditions that benefit all. Today, the FOMC raised its policy interest rate by ¼ percentage point. Since early last year, we have raised interest rates by a total of 5 percentage points in order to attain a stance of monetary policy that is sufficiently restrictive to return inflation to 2 percent over time. We are also continuing to reduce our securities holdings. Looking ahead, we will take a data dependent approach in determining the extent to which additional policy firming may be appropriate. I will have more to say about today’s monetary policy actions after briefly reviewing economic developments. The U.S. economy slowed significantly last year, with real GDP rising at a below trend pace of 0.9 percent. The pace of economic growth in the first quarter of this year continued to be modest, at 1.1 percent, despite a pickup in consumer spending. Activity in the housing sector remains weak, largely reflecting higher mortgage, mortgage rates. Higher interest rates and slower output growth also appear to be weighing on business fixed investment. The labor market remains very tight. Over the first three months of the year, job gains averaged 345,000 jobs per month. The unemployment rate remained very low in March, at 3.5 percent. Even so, there are some signs that supply and demand in the labor market are coming back into better balance. The labor force participation rate has moved up in recent months, particularly for individuals aged 25 to 54 years. Nominal wage growth has sown— shown some signs of easing, and job vacancies have declined so far this year. But overall, labor demand still substantially exceeds the supply of available workers. Inflation remains well above our longer run goal of 2 percent. Over the 12 months ending in March, total PCE prices rose 4.2 percent  excluding the volatile food and energy categories, core PCE prices rose 4.6 percent. Inflation has moderated somewhat since the middle of last year. Nonetheless, inflation pressures continue to run high, and the process of getting inflation back down to 2 percent has a long way to go. Despite elevated inflation, longer term inflation expectations appear to remain well anchored, as reflected in a broad range of surveys of households, businesses, and forecasters, as well as measures from financial markets. The Fed’s monetary policy actions are guided by, by our mandate to promote maximum employment and stable prices for the American people. My colleagues and I are acutely aware that high inflation imposes significant hardship, as it erodes purchasing power, especially for those least able to meet the higher costs of essentials like food, housing, and transportation. We are highly attentive to the risks that high inflation pose—poses to both sides of our mandate, and we are strongly committed to returning inflation to our 2 percent objective. At today’s meeting, the Committee raised the target range for the federal funds rate by ¼ percentage point, bringing the target range to 5 to 5¼ percent. And we’re continuing to [carry out] the process of significantly reducing our securities holdings. With today’s action, we have raised interest rates by 5 percentage points in a little more than a year. We are seeing the effects of our policy tightening on demand in the most interest rate–sensitive sectors of the economy, particularly housing and investment. It will take time, however, for the full effects of monetary restraint to be realized, especially on inflation. In addition, the economy is likely to face further headwinds from tighter credit conditions. Credit conditions had already been tightening over the past year or so in response to our policy actions and a softer economic outlook. But the strains that emerged in the banking sector in early March appear to be resulting in even tighter credit conditions for households and businesses. In turn, these tighter credit conditions are likely to weigh on economic activity, hiring, and inflation. The extent of these effects remains uncertain. In light of these uncertain headwinds, along with the monetary policy restraint we have put in place, our future policy actions will depend on how events unfold. In determining the extent to which additional policy firming may be appropriate to return inflation to 2 percent over time, the Committee will take into account the cumulative tightening of monetary policy, the lags with which monetary policy affects economic activity and inflation, and economic and financial developments. We, we will make that determination meeting by meeting, based on the totality of incoming data and their implications for the outlook for economic activity and inflation. And we are prepared to do more if greater monetary policy restraint is warranted. We remain committed to bringing inflation back down to our 2 percent goal and to keep longer term inflation expectations well anchored. Reducing inflation is likely to require a period of below trend growth and some softening of labor market conditions. Restoring price stability is essential to set the stage for achieving maximum employment and stable prices over the longer run. To conclude: We understand that our actions affect communities, families, and businesses across the country. Everything we do is in service to our public mission. We at the Fed will do everything we can to achieve our maximum employment and price stability goals. Thank you. I look forward to your questions. . So, taking your question—of course, today our decision was to raise the federal funds rate by 25 basis points. A, a decision on a pause was not made today. You will have noticed that in the—in the statement from March, we had a sentence that said the Committee anticipates that some additional policy firming may be appropriate. That sentence is, is not in, in the statement anymore. We took that out, and instead we’re saying that, in determining the extent to which additional policy firming may be appropriate to return inflation to 2 percent over time, the Committee will take into account certain factors. So we—that’s a— that’s a meaningful change that we’re no longer saying that we anticipate. And so we’ll be driven by incoming data meeting by meeting. And, you know, we’ll approach that question at the June meeting. So the—the staff’s forecast is—so let me say—start by saying that that’s not my own most likely case, which is really that, that the economy will continue to grow at, at a modest rate this year. And I think that’s—so different people on the Committee have different forecasts. That’s, that’s my own assessment of the most likely path. [The] staff produces its own forecast, and it’s independent of the forecasts of, of the participants, which include the Governors and the Reserve Bank presidents, of course. And we think this is a healthy thing— that the, the staff is writing down what they really think. They’re not especially influenced by what the Governors think, and vice versa. The Governors are not taking what the staff says and just writing that down. So it’s actually good that the, the staff and individual participants can have different perspectives. So, broadly, the forecast was for a mild recession, and by that I would characterize as one in which the rise in unemployment is smaller than is—has been typical in modern era recessions. I wouldn’t want to characterize the staff’s forecast for this meeting. We’ll, we’ll leave that to the minutes—but broadly, broadly similar to that. . So I wouldn’t want to speculate specifically, but I will say this: These are fiscal policy matters, for starters, and they’re, they’re for Congress and the Administration—for the elected parts of the government to deal with. And they’re really consigned to them. From our standpoint, I would just say this: It’s essential that the debt ceiling be raised in a timely way, so that the U.S. government can pay all of its bills when they’re due. A failure to do that would be unprecedented. We’d be in uncharted territory, and the—and the consequences to the U.S. economy would be highly uncertain and could, could be quite a[d]verse. So I’ll just leave it there. We, we don’t give advice to either side. We just would point out that it—that it’s very important that this be done. And the, the other point I’ll make about that, though, is that no one should assume that the Fed can protect the economy from the potential, you know, short  and long term effects of a failure to pay our bills on time. We, we— it’s, it would be so uncertain that it’s just as important that, that this—we never get to a place where we’re actually talking about or even having a situation where the U.S. government’s not paying its bills. . I wouldn’t say that it did. It was—of course, it’s something that came up. We talk a lot about risks to the—to the outlook, and that will—that come up. A number of people did raise that as a risk to the outlook. I wouldn’t say that it was important in today’s monetary policy decision. . Sure. So the February 14 presentation—I didn’t remember it very well. But now, of course, I’ve gone back and looked at it very carefully. I did remember it. And what it was was a general presentation. It was an informational briefing of the whole Board— the entire Board. I think all members were there. And it was about interest rate risk in the banks and, and lots of data. And there was one page on Silicon Valley Bank, which talked about, you know, the amount of losses they—or mark to market losses they had in their portfolio. There was nothing in it about—that I recall, anyway, about, about the risk of a bank run. So it was—I think the takeaway was, they were going away to do a—an assessment, a vertical—sorry, horizontal assessment of, of banks. It wasn’t—it, it wasn’t presented as an urgent or alarming situation. It was presented as a—as an informational, nondecisional kind of a thing. And I thought it was a good presentation and, and, as I said, did remember it. In terms of what we’re doing—of course, I think banks themselves are, are—many, many banks are now, are attending to liquidity and taking opportunity now, really, since, since the events of, of early March, to build liquidity. And you asked about the separation principle. I— you know, like so many things, it, it’s very useful. But, you know, ultimately, it has its limits. I mean, I, I think in this particular case, we have found that the monetary policy tools and the financial stability tools are not in conflict. They’re both—they’re working well together. We’ve used our, our financial stability tools to support banks through our lending facilities. And, at the same time, we’ve been able to use our monetary policy tools to foster maximum employment and price stability. . Well, I mean, I didn’t say it wasn’t alarming. It was—they’re pointing out something that they’re working on and that they’re on the case—that, that, you know, that—I’m not sure whether they mentioned—I think they did, actually. They mentioned that they had taken regulatory action matter—or supervisory action in the form of matters requiring attention. So I think that was also in the presentation. I think it was to say: Yes, this is a bank, and there are many other banks that are experiencing this—these things, and we’re on the case. . So I, you know, we certainly don’t—and I don’t have an agenda to further consolidate banks. There’s been—consolidation has been a factor in the U.S. banking industry really since interstate banking and before that even—it goes back more than 30 years. You—when I was in the government a while back, I think there were 14,000 banks. Now there are 4,000 and change. So that’s, that’s going on. I personally have long felt that having small , medium , and large size banks is a, a great part of our banking system. You know, the community banks serve particular customers very well  regional banks serve very important purposes, and the various kinds of G SIBs do as well. So I think it’s healthy to have a, you know, an arrange—a range of different kinds of banks doing different things. I think that’s a positive thing. Is it a financial—so I would just say, in terms of J.P. Morgan buying First Republic, the FDIC really runs the process of closing and selling a closed bank completely. That, that is their role, so I really don’t have a comment on, on that process. As you know, there’s an exception to the deposit cap for a failing bank. So it was legitimate. And I think the FDIC, I believe, is bound by law to take the bid that is the least cost bid. So I would assume that’s what they did. . So I, I think it’s probably good policy that we, we don’t want the largest banks doing big acquisitions. That is the policy. And—but this is—this is an exception for a failing bank. And I, I think it’s actually a good outcome for the banking system. It also would have—would have been a good—a good outcome for the banking system had one of the regional banks bought, bought this company. And that could have been the outcome. But, ultimately, we have to follow the law in our agencies, and the law is, it goes to the, the least cost bid. . Yeah. I think—I think I follow that up by saying, it’s, it’s quite impossible to have a precise estimate of the words to that effect. But, in principle, that’s the idea. You know, when we—we’ve been raising interest rates, and that raises the price of credit, and that, in a sense, restricts credit in the economy, working through the price mechanism. And, you know, when banks raise their credit standards, that can also make credit tighter in a kind of broadly similar way. It isn’t—it isn’t possible to make a kind of clean translation between one and the other, although firms are trying that and, you know, we’re trying it. But, ultimately, we have to be—we have to be honest and humble about our ability to make a precise assessment. So it does complicate the task of achieving, you know, a sufficiently restrictive stance. But I think, conceptually, though, we think that, you know, interest rates—in principle, we won’t have to raise the rates quite as high as we would have had this not happened. The extent of that is so hard to predict because we don’t know how persistent these, these effects will be. We don’t know how large they’ll be and how long they’ll take to be transmitted. But that’s, that’s what we’ll be watching carefully to find out. . It’s that—this is just something that we have to factor in as we—as we want to find ourselves. So I guess I would say it this way: The assessment of, of the extent to which additional policy firming may be appropriate is going to be an ongoing one, meeting by meeting, and we’re going to be looking at the factors that I mentioned that—they’re listed in, in the statement, the obvious factors. That’s, that’s the way we’re going to be thinking about it. And that’s really all we can do. As I say, it does complicate—we, we have, you know, a broad understanding of monetary policy. Credit tightening is a different thing. There’s a lot of literature on that. But translating it into, into rate hikes is uncertain, let’s say—it adds even further uncertainty. Nonetheless, we’ll be able to see what’s happening with credit conditions— what’s happening with lending. We get—there’s a lot of data on that. And, you know, we’ll, we’ll factor that into our decisionmaking. . That’s going to be an ongoing assessment. We’re going to need data to accumulate on that—not an assessment that we’ve made, as—that, that would mean we think we’ve reached that point. And I just think it’s, it’s not possible to say that with confidence now. But, nonetheless, you, you will know that the Summary of Economic Projections from the March meeting showed that in—at that point in time, that the median participant thought that this was— this was the appropriate level of the—of the ultimate high level of rates. We don’t know that. We’ll revisit that at the June meeting. And that’s—you know, we’re just going to have to— before we really declare that, I think we’re going to have to see data accumulating and, and, you know, make that—as I mentioned, it’s an ongoing assessment. . So we’re going to release the results of this SLOOS on May 8, in line with our usual time frame. And I would just say that the SLOOS is broadly consistent, when you see it, with how we and others have been thinking about the situation and what we’re seeing from other sources. You will have seen the Beige Book and listened to the various earnings calls that indicate that midsize banks have—some of them had been tightening their lending standards. Banking data will show that lending has continued to grow, but the pace has been slowing really since the second half of last year. . Well, we—the reason is that we—again, with our monetary policy we’re try—trying to reach and then—and then stay at a, for an extended period, a level of policy—a policy stance that’s sufficiently restrictive to bring inflation down to 2 percent over time. And, you know, that’s what we’re trying to do with our—with our tool. I think slowing down was the right move. I, I think it’s enabled us to see more data, and it will continue to do so. So I, I—you know, we really—you know, we have to balance. We always have to balance the risk of not doing enough and, and not getting inflation under control against the risk of maybe slowing down economic activity too much. And we thought that this rate hike, along with the meaningful change in, in our policy statement, was the right way to balance that. . Yeah. I mean, as I mentioned, I would just say that this assessment will be an ongoing one. You—you know, you can’t—with, with economic data, you, you can’t—you’ve, you’ve seen—take inflation for a minute. Look, look back. We’ve seen inflation come down—move back up two or three times since March of 2021. We’ve seen inflation have a few months of coming down and then come right back up. So I think you’re going to want to see that—you know, that a few months of data will, will persuade you that you’ve—that you’ve got this right, kind of thing. And, you know, we, we have the luxury: We’ve raised 500 basis points. I think that policy is tight. I think real rates are probably—that you can calculate them many different ways. But one way is to look at the nominal rate and then subtract a, a reasonable estimate of, of, let’s say, one year inflation, which might be 3 percent. So you’ve got 2 percent real rates. That’s meaningfully above what most people would—many people, anyway, would, would assess as, you know, the neutral rate. So policy is tight. And you see that in interest— interest sensitive activities. And you also begin to see it more and more in, in other activities. And if you—if you put the—you put the credit tightening on top of that and the QT that’s, that’s ongoing, I think, I think you feel like, you know, we’re, we may not be far off—we’re possibly even at—that level. . Look—I think we’re always going to have 2 percent as our, our target. We’re always going to be focusing on getting there. . You know, it’s—let me just say, that’s not what we’re looking for. We’re looking for inflation going down to 2 percent over time. I mean, we—that’s, that’s not a question that’s in front of us, and it would depend on so many other things. But, ultimately, we’re not looking to get to 3 percent and then drop our tools. We have a, a goal of getting to 2 percent. We think it’s going to take some time. We don’t think it’ll be a smooth process. And, you know, I think we’re going to—we’re going to need to stay at this for a while. . I think they, they—you know, they, they will both matter equally at that point. Right now, you have a labor market that’s still extraordinarily tight. You still got 1.6 job openings, even with the lower job openings number, for every unemployed person. We do see some evidence of softening in labor market conditions. But, overall, you’re near a 50 year low in unemployment. Wages—you all will have seen that the wage number from late last week, and it’s—whenever it was. And, you know, it’s, it’s a couple of percentage points above what would be—what would be consistent with 2 percent inflation over time. So we do see some softening  we see new labor supply coming in. These are very positive developments. But the labor market is very, very strong, whereas inflation is, you know, running high—well above our—well above our goal. And right now, we need to be focusing on bringing inflation down. Fortunately, we’ve been able to do that so far without unemployment going up. . Yeah. I don’t think—you know, I know what’s printed in the Summary of Economic Projections and all that. I don’t think you can deduce exactly what you said about what participants think, because you don’t know what they were thinking for first  quarter GDP at that point. They could have been thinking about a fairly low number. Anyway, in any case, I’ll just say, I, I continue to think that it’s possible that this time is really different. And the reason is, there’s just so much excess demand, really, in the labor market. It’s, it’s interesting, as, you know, we’ve raised rates by 5 percentage points in 14 months, and the unemployment rate is 3½ percent, pretty much where it was—even lower than where it was when we started. So job openings are still very, very high. We see—by surveys and much, much [other] evidence—that, that conditions are cooling gradually. But it’s—it really is different. You know, it wasn’t supposed to be possible for job openings to decline by as much of the—as they’ve declined without unemployment going up. Well, that’s what we’ve seen. So we—there are no promises in this. But it just seems that, to me, that it’s possible that we can continue to have a cooling in the labor market without having the big increases in unemployment that have gone with many, you know, prior episodes. Now, that would be against history. I, I fully appreciate that. That would be against the, the pattern. But I do think that it—that this, that the situation in the labor market, with so much excess demand, yet, you know, wages are actually—wages have been moving down. Wage increases have been moving down, and that’s a good sign—down to a more sustainable level. So I think that—I think it’s still possible. I—you know, I think, you know, the, the case of, of avoiding a recession is, in my view, more likely than that of having, having a recession. But it’s not—it’s not that the case of having a recession is—I don’t rule that out, either. It’s, it’s possible that we will have what I hope would be a mild recession. . Sure. So we look at a range of wage, wage measures. And then that’s in nominal. And then—so you assume wages should be equal to productivity increases plus inflation. And so you can—you can look at, you know, the employment compensation index, average hourly earnings, the Atlanta wage tracker, compensation per hour—basically, those four and many others. And you can—you can look at, at what the—what they would have to run at over a long period of time for that to be consistent with 2 percent inflation. They can deviate. You know, corporate margins can go up and down. And there is a feature of long expansions where they do go down—where labor gets a bigger share toward later, later in a recession—sorry, later in an expansion. So, yeah. The, the—you know, and we calculate those, and you have to take the precision with a degree of—a degree of salt. But I would say that what they will show is that, you know, if, if the—if wages are running at 5 percent, 3 percent is closer to where they need to be. Wage increases and closer to 3 percent, roughly, is what it would take to get—to be consistent with inflation over a longer period of time. I—by the way, I don’t want to—I do not think that wages are the principal driver of inflation. You’re asking me a very specific question. I think there are many things. I think wages and prices tend to move together. And it’s very hard to say what’s causing what. But, you know, I’ve never said that, you know, that—that wages are really the principal driver, because I don’t think that’s really right. . So higher profits and higher margins are what happens when you have an imbalance between supply and demand: too much demand, not enough supply. And we’ve been in a situation in many parts of the economy where, where supply has been fixed or, or not flexible enough. And so, you know, the way the market clears is through higher prices. So to get, I, I think—as goods pipelines have, have gotten, you know, back to normal so that we don’t have the long waits and the shortages and that kind of thing—I think you will see inflation come down. And you’ll see—you’ll see corporate margins coming down as a result of return of full competition, where there’s enough supply to meet demand. And then it’s—then it’s, then you’re really back to full competition. That’s—that would be the dynamic I would expect. . I didn’t catch the last part. Rolling? . Oh, yes. Sorry, sorry, sorry. Okay, I got it. So, what are we looking at? I mean, we look at a combination of data and, and forecasts. Of course, the whole idea is to—is to create a good forecast based on what you see in the data. So we’re always, always looking at both. You know, and it will—of course, it’ll be the obvious things. It’ll be readings on inflation. It’ll be readings on wages, on economic growth, on the labor market, and all of those many things. I think a particular focus for us going—now, over the past six, seven weeks now and going forward is going to be, what’s happening with credit tightening? Are small and medium sized banks tightening credit standards, and, and is that having an effect on, on loans, on lending? And, you know, so we can begin to assess how that fits in with monetary policy. That’ll, that’ll be an important thing. I just—you know, we’ll be looking at everything. It’s— again, I would just point out, we’ve raised rates by 5 percentage points. We are shrinking the balance sheet. And now we have credit conditions tightening—not just in the normal way, but perhaps a little bit more, due to what’s happened. And we have to factor all of that in and, and make our assessment of—you know, of whether our policy stance is sufficiently restrictive. And we have to do that in a world where policy works with long and variable lags. So this is challenging. But, you know, we, we will make our best assessment, and that’s what we think. . Yeah. So we on the Committee have a—have a view that inflation is going to come down—not so quickly, but it’ll take some time. And in that world, if that forecast is broadly right, it would not be appropriate and—to cut rates, and we won’t cut rates. If you have a different forecast and, you know, markets—or have been, from time to time, pricing in, you know, quite rapid reductions in inflation, you know, we’d, we’d factor that in. But that’s not our forecast. And, of course, the history of the last two years has been very much that inflation moves down. Particularly now, if you look at nonhousing services, it really, really hasn’t moved much. And it’s quite stable. And, you know, so we think we’ll have to—demand will have to weaken a little bit, and labor market conditions, conditions may have to soften a bit more to begin to see progress there. And, again, in that world, it wouldn’t be—it wouldn’t be appropriate for us to cut rates. . Sure. So we looked at that very carefully, as you would imagine. And, you know, the—it’s, it’s really not contributing, we don’t think, now. It hasn’t actually been growing. You know, it moved up—moved down and then moved back up to where it was. What happened in the—when, when there were the big deposit flows, which, by the way, have really stabilized now—what happened was, institutional investors took their uninsured deposits and put them in government money market funds, which bought paper from the Federal Home Loan Banks and things like that. Over the course of, of maybe the last year, retail investors had been gradual—as they do in every tightening cycle, they’ve been gradually moving their deposits into higher yielding places such as CDs and, and other things, including money market funds. So that’s a gradual process that is quite natural and happens during a, a tightening cycle. What was unusual, really, was the institutional investors moving their uninsured deposits and spreading them around and things like that. But it doesn’t seem to have had any—any effect overall on the overnight repo facility. That is really there to, to help us keep rates where they’re supposed to be, and it’s, it’s serving that purpose very well. . Yeah. I would just say, it’s —I, I don’t really think we should be— we shouldn’t even be talking about a world in which the U.S. doesn’t pay its bills. It just—it just shouldn’t be a thing. And, and again, I would just say, we don’t—no one should assume that the Fed can do—can really protect the economy and the financial system and our reputation globally from, from the damage that such, such an event might inflict. . So I, I didn’t—I didn’t take part in creating the report or doing the work, but I do—I have read it, of course. And I find it persuasive. I mean, I would say it this way: A, a very large—a large bank, not a very large bank—a large bank failed quite suddenly and unexpectedly in a way that threatened to spread contagion into the financial system. I think the only thing that, that I’m really focused on is to understand what went wrong, what happened, and, and identify what we need to do to address that. Some of that is—may, it may just have been technology evolving. You know, we have to keep up with all that. But some of it may be our policies, and—supervisory and regulatory, whatever. What our job is now is, identify those things and implement them. And that’s kind of the only thing I care about is—and I think—I feel like I am accountable for doing everything I can to make sure that that happens. . So I guess I would—I guess I would say it this way. There were three large banks, really, from the very beginning that were at the heart of the stress that we— that we saw in early March, the severe period of stress. Those have now all been resolved, and all the depositors have been protected. I think that the resolution and sale of, of First Republic kind of draws a line under that period of—is an important step toward drawing a line under that period of, of severe stress. Okay. I also think we are very focused on what’s happening with credit availability, particularly, you know, with what you saw in the—in the Beige Book, and you will see in the SLOOS, is, is small and medium—medium sized, small and medium sized banks who are feeling that they need to tighten credit standards—build liquidity. What’s going to be the macroeconomic effect of that? More broadly, we, we will continue to very carefully monitor what’s going on in the banking system, and we’ll factor that assessment into our decisions in an important way, going forward. . Sure. So let me say, first of all, I’ve been Chair of the Board for five plus years now, and I fully recognize that we made mistakes. I think we’ve learned some new things as well, and we need to do better. And, as I mentioned, I thought the report was unflinching and appropriately so. I welcome it. And I agree with and will support those recommendations. And I do feel that I’m personally accountable to do what I can to foster measures that will address the problems. So, on, on the Vice Chair for Supervision, you know, the place to start is, is the statutory role, which is quite unusual. The Vice Chair, it says, shall deploy policy recommendations—“develop policy recommendations for the Board regarding supervision and regulation of depository institution . . . companies . . . , and shall oversee the supervision and regulation of such firms.” So this is Congress establishing a four year term for someone else on the Board—not, not the Chair—as Vice Chair for Supervision who really gets to set the agenda for supervision and regulation for the Board of Governors. Congress wanted that person to be—to have political accountability for developing that agenda. So the way it works—the way it has worked in practice for me is, I’ve had a good working relationship. I give my, my counsel, my input privately, and that’s—I offer that. And I have good conversations, and I try to contribute constructively. I respect the authority that Congress has deferred on that person, including working with, with Vice Chair Barr and, and his predecessor. And I think that’s the way it’s supposed to work, and that’s appropriate. I, I believe that’s what the law requires. And, you know—but, but it isn’t—I wouldn’t say it’s a matter of complete deference. It’s more, I have a—I have a role in, in presenting my views and discussing—having an intelligent discussion about what’s going on and why. And, you know, that’s, that’s my input. But, ultimately, that person does get to set the agenda and gets to take things to the Board of Governors and really, in supervision, has sole authority over supervision. . I’ve had a few, sure. I mean, you know, who doesn’t look back and think that you could have done things differently? But, honestly, you don’t—you don’t get to do that. Again, my focus is on what—control the controllable. As one of my great mentors used to always say, “Control the controllable.” What we control now is, make a fair assessment, learn the right lessons, figure out what the fixes are, and implement them. And, and I think that, that Vice Chair Barr’s report is an excellent first step in that, but we’ve got to follow through. . So support for the 25 basis point rate increase was very strong across the board. I would say there are a number of people—and, you know, you’ll see this in the minutes. I don’t want to try to do the head count in real time. But people did talk about pausing, but not so much at this meeting, you know, that we’re—I mean, there’s a sense that we’re, we’re—that, you know, we’re much closer to the end of this than to the beginning, that—you know, as I mentioned, if you—if you add up all the tightening that’s going on through various channels, it’s—we, we feel like we—you know, we’re getting close or, or maybe even there. But that, again, that’s going to be an ongoing assessment. And, and we’re going to be looking at those factors that we listed and—to determine whether there’s, there’s more to do. . I don’t want to—I couldn’t—I couldn’t really say. I just think we’re—I think we—look, I think we’ve moved a long way fairly quickly. And I think we can afford to look at the data and, and make a careful assessment. . Well, I just would start with something that’s changed, really, which is this—the run on Silicon Valley Bank was out of keeping with the speed of runs through history. And that now needs to be reflected in some—in some way in regulation and in supervision. It—we know—now that we know it’s possible, I think we didn’t—no one thought that was possible. No one—I’m not aware of anybody thinking that this could happen so—quite so quickly. So I think that, you know, that will play through. I, I, you know—it will be up to Vice Chair Barr to really take the lead in designing the ways to address that. But I think—I think that’s one thing. I, I guess I would just say that. Then, you know—that we’re going to— obviously, we’re going to revisit [this]. It’s pretty clear we need—to me, anyways—clear that we need to strengthen both supervision and regulations for banks of this size. And I’m, I’m thinking that we’re on the—on track to do that as well. . Yeah. That’s—see, that’s, that’s what Vice Chair Barr’s role really is, and he’ll take the lead on that. Thank you.

****FOMCpresconf20230614

. Good afternoon. My colleagues and I remain squarely focused on our dual mandate to promote maximum employment and stable prices for the American people. We understand the hardship that high inflation is causing, and we remain strongly committed to bringing inflation back down to our 2 percent goal. Price stability is the responsibility of the Federal Reserve. Without price stability, the economy doesn’t work for anyone. In particular, without price stability, we will not achieve a sustained period of strong labor market conditions that benefit all. Since early last year, the FOMC has significantly tightened the stance of monetary policy. We have raised our policy interest rate by 5 percentage points, and we’ve continued to reduce our securities holdings at a brisk pace. We’ve covered a lot of ground, and the full effects of our tightening have yet to be felt. In light of how far we’ve come in tightening policy, the uncertain lags with which monetary policy affects the economy, and potential headwinds from credit tightening, today we decided to leave our policy interest rate unchanged and to continue to reduce our securities holdings. Looking ahead, nearly all Committee participants view it as likely that some further rate increases will be appropriate this year to bring inflation down to 2 percent over time. And I will have more to say about monetary policy after briefly reviewing economic developments. The U.S. economy slowed significantly last year, and recent indicators suggest that economic activity has continued to expand at a modest pace. Although growth in consumer spending has picked up this year, activity in the housing sector remains weak, largely reflecting higher mortgage rates. Higher interest rates and slower output growth also appear to be weighing on business fixed investment. Committee participants generally expect subdued growth to continue. In our Summary of Economic Projections, the median projection has real GDP growth at 1.0 percent this year and 1.1 percent next year, well below the median estimate of the longer run normal growth rate. The labor market remains very tight. Over the past three months, payroll job gains averaged a robust 283,000 jobs per month. The unemployment rate moved up but remained low in May at 3.7 percent. There are some signs that supply and demand in the labor market are coming into better balance. The labor force participation rate has moved up in recent months, particularly for individuals aged 25 to 54 years. Nominal wage growth has shown signs of easing, and job vacancies have declined so far this year. While the jobs to workers gap has declined, labor demand still substantially exceeds the supply of available workers. FOMC participants expect supply and demand conditions in the labor market to come into better balance over time, easing upward pressures on inflation. The median unemployment rate projection in the SEP rises to 4.1 percent at the end of this year and 4.5 percent at the end of next year. Inflation remains well above our longer run 2 percent goal. Over the 12 months ending in April, total PCE proces—prices rose 4.4 percent  excluding the volatile food and energy categories, core PCE prices rose 4.7 percent. In May, the 12 month change in the consumer price index came in at 4 percent, and the change in the core, core CPI was 5.3 percent. Inflation has moderated somewhat since the middle of last year. Nonetheless, inflation pressures continue to run high, and the process of getting inflation back down to 2 percent has a long way to go. The median projection in the SEP for total PCE inflation is 3.2 percent this year, 2.5 percent next year, and 2.1 percent in 2025. Core PCE inflation, which excludes volatile food and energy prices, is projected to run higher than total inflation, and the median projection has been revised in the SEP up to 3.9 percent this year. Despite elevated inflation, longer term inflation expectations appear to remain well anchored, as reflected in a broad range of surveys of households, businesses, and forecasters, as well as measures from financial markets. The Fed’s monetary policy actions are guided by our mandate to promote maximum employment and price—and stable prices for the American people. My colleagues and I are acutely aware that high inflation imposes hardship, as it erodes purchasing power, especially for those least able to meet the higher costs of essentials like food, housing, and transportation. We are highly attentive to the risks that high inflation poses to both sides of our mandate, and we’re strongly committed to returning inflation to our 2 percent objective. As I noted earlier, since early last year, we’ve raised our policy rate by 5 percentage points. We have been seeing the effects of our policy tightening on demand in the most interest rate–sensitive sectors of the economy, especially housing and investment. It will take time, however, for the full effects of monetary restraint to be realized, especially on inflation. The economy is facing headwinds from tighter credit conditions for households and businesses, which are likely to weigh on economic activity, hiring, and inflation. The extent of these effects remains uncertain. In light of how far we’ve come in tightening policy, the uncertain lags with which monetary policy affects the economy, and potential headwinds from credit tightening, the Committee decided at today’s meeting to maintain the target range for the federal funds rate at 5 to 5¼ percent and to continue the process of significantly reducing our securities holdings. As I noted earlier, nearly, nearly all Committee participants expect that it will be appropriate to raise interest rates somewhat further by the end of the year. But at this meeting, considering how far and how fast we’ve moved, we judged it prudent to hold the target range steady to allow the Committee to assess additional information and its implications for monetary policy. In determining the extent of additional policy firming that may be appropriate to return inflation to 2 percent over time, the Committee will take into account the cumulative tightening of monetary policy, the lags with which monetary policy affects economic activity and inflation, and economic and financial developments. In our SEP, participants wrote down their individual assessments of an appropriate path for the federal funds rate based on what each participant judges to be the most likely scenario going forward. If the economy evolves as projected, the median participant projects that the appropriate level of the federal funds rate will be 5.6 percent at the end of this year, 4.6 percent at the end of 2024, and 3.4 percent at the end of 2025. For the end of this year, the median projection is ½ percentage point higher than in our March projections. I hasten to add, as always, that these projections are not a Committee decision or plan. If the economy does not evolve as projected, the path for policy will adjust as appropriate to foster our maximum  employment and price stability goals. We will continue to make our decisions meeting by meeting, based on the totality of incoming data and their implications for the outlook for economic activity and inflation, as well as the balance of risks. We remain committed to bringing inflation—bringing inflation back down to our 2 percent goal and to keeping longer term inflation expectations well anchored. Reducing inflation is likely to require a period of below trend growth and some softening of labor market conditions. Restoring price stability is essential to set the stage for achieving maximum employment and stable prices over the longer run. To conclude: We understand that our actions affect communities, families, and businesses across the country. Everything we do at the Fed is in service to our public mission. We will do everything we can to achieve our maximum employment and price stability goals. Thank you. And I look forward to your questions. . So, I guess I would—I guess I would go back to the beginning of this tightening cycle to address that. So as we started our rate hikes early last year, we said there were three issues that would need to be addressed kind of in sequence—that of the speed of tightening, the level to which rates would need to go, and then a period of time over which we’d need to keep policy restrictive. So at the outset, going back 15 months, the key issue was how fast to move rates up, and we moved very quickly by historical standards. Then last December, after four consecutive 75 basis point hikes, we moderated to a pace of 50—of a 50 basis point hike and then this year to three 25 basis point hikes at sequential meetings. So it seemed to us to make obvious sense to moderate our rate hikes as we got closer to our destination. So the decision to consider not hiking at every meeting and ultimately to hold rates steady at this meeting, I would just say it’s a continuation of, of that process. The main issue that we’re focused on now is determining the extent of additional policy firming that may be appropriate to return inflation to 2 percent over time—so that the pace of the increases and the ultimate level of increases are separate variables, given how far it—we have come. It may make sense for rates to move higher but at a more moderate pace. I want to stress one more thing—and that is that the Committee decision made today was only about this meeting. We didn’t make any decision about going forward, including what would happen at the next meeting, including—we did not decide or really discuss anything about going to an every other meeting kind of an approach or, or really any other approach. We really were focused on what to do at this meeting. . So again, we didn’t—we didn’t make a decision about July. I mean, of course, it, it came up in the—in the meeting from time to time. But really, the focus was, was on what to do today. I would say about, about July two things: (1) [the] decision hasn’t been made, (2) I do expect that it will be a “live” meeting. . Sure. . So you’re, you’re right that the data came in, I would say, consistent with, but on the high side of, expectations. And if you go back to the old—the former SEP—the last SEP in March, you will see that [compared with March, projected real GDP] growth moved up. These are not huge moves, but growth estimates moved up a bit. Unemployment estimates moved down a bit. Inflation estimates moved up a bit. And, you know, all three of those kind of point in the same direction—which is, you know, that perhaps more [monetary policy] restraint will be necessary than we had thought at the last meeting. So although the level, frankly, is, is pretty—the level of 5.6 [percent] is pretty consistent, if you think about it, where the [expected] federal funds rate was trading before the bank incidents of early March. So—but so we’ve kind of gone back to that. So your question is, where’s the—where’s the disinflation going to come from? And I, you know, I don’t think the story has really changed. We—the Committee has consistently said and believed that the process of getting inflation down is going to be a gradual one. It’s going to take some time. And I think you go back to the—to the three part framework for [analyzing] core PCE inflation—which is, we think, as good an indicator as you can have for where inflation is going forward. You start with goods. With goods, we need to see continued healing in supply conditions—supply side conditions. They’ve definitely improved a substantial amount, but if you talk to people in business, they will say it’s not back to where it was. So that’s, that’s one thing. And that should enable goods prices to continue—goods, goods inflation to continue to come down over time. In terms of housing services inflation—that’s another big piece. And, and you are seeing there that new rents in new, new leases are, are coming in at low levels. And it’s really a matter of time as that goes through the pipeline. In fact, I think any forecast that people are making right now about inflation coming down this year will, will contain a big dose of—this year and next year—will contain a, a good amount of, of disinflation [coming] from that source. And, and that’s, again, probably going to come slower than we would [previously have expected it to come into] effect. That leaves, you know, the big sector, which is a little more than half, pardon me, of the—of core PCE inflation that’s not housing services. And, you know, we see only the earliest signs of disinflation there. It’s a sector—it’s a very broad and diverse sector. I would say [that,] in a number of the parts of that sector, the largest cost would be wage cost. It’s the service sector, so it’s, it’s heavily labor intensive. And I think many analysts would say that the key to getting inflation down there is to have a continuing loosening in labor market conditions—which we have seen. We have actually seen, you know—I go through a number of indicators suggesting there has been some loosening in labor market conditions. We need to see that continue. I would almost say that the, the conditions that we need to see in place to get inflation down are, are coming into place. And that would be [real GDP] growth meaningfully below trend. It would be a labor market that’s loosening. It would be goods pipelines getting healthier and healthier and that kind of thing. There, there—the things are in place that we need to see, but the process of that actually working on inflation is going to take some time. . So the—first, I would say that the, the question of speed is a separate question from the question—from the—from, from that of level. Okay. So—and I think if you look at the SEP, that is our estimate—our individual—it’s, it’s really a cumulation of our individual estimates of how far to go. I, I mentioned how, how we got to those numbers. In terms of speed, it’s, it’s what I said at the beginning, which is, speed was very important last year. As we get closer and closer to the destination—and, according to the SEP, we’re not so far away from the destination, in most people’s accounting—it’s, it’s reasonable—it’s common sense to go a little slower, just as it was reasonable to go from 75 basis points to 50 to 25 at every meeting. And so the Committee thought overall that it was appropriate to moderate the pace, if only slightly. Then there are benefits to that. So that gives us more information to make decisions. We may try to make better decisions. I think it allows the economy a little more time to adapt as we—as we make our decisions going forward, and we’ll get to see, you know—we haven’t really—we don’t know the full extent of, of the consequences of the banking turmoil that we’ve seen. We, we—it would be early to see those, but we don’t know what the extent is. We’ll have some more time to see that unfold. I mean, it’s, it’s just the idea that we’re trying to get this right. And this is—if you think of the two things as separate variables, then I think—I think that the skip—I shouldn’t call it a skip—the, the decision makes sense. . Well, I think you’re adding that to the, the data that we’ve seen since the last meeting, too. You know, we—since we chose to maintain rates at this meeting, it’ll really be a three month period of data that we can look at. And I think that’s a full quarter, and I think you can—you can draw more conclusions from that than you can from any six—any six  week period. We’ll look at those things. We’ll also look at the evolving risk picture. We’ll look at what’s happening in the financial sector. We’ll look at all the data, the evolving outlook, and we’ll make a decision. . You know, I—I mean, on the first part, I just think we’re following the data and also the outlook. The economy is—the labor market, I think, has surprised many, if not all, analysts over the last couple of years with its extraordinary resilience, really. And it’s, it’s just remarkable. And that’s really, if you think about it—that’s what’s driving it. It’s job creation. It’s, it’s wages moving up. It’s, it’s supporting spending, which in turn is supporting hiring. And it’s, it’s really the engine, it seems, that is—that is driving the economy. And so it’s, it’s really the, the data. In terms of, you know—we, we always write down at these meetings what we think the appropriate terminal rate will be at the end of this year. That’s, that’s how we do it. It’s based on our, our own individual assessments of what the most likely path of the economy is. It can be—it can actually, in reality, wind up being lower or higher. And, you know, there’s really no way to know. But it’s—it is—it’s, it’s what people think as of today, and as the—as the data come in, it, it can move around during the intermeeting period. It could wind up back in the same place. But it really will be data driven. I can’t—I can’t tell you that that I ever have a lot of confidence that we can see where the—where the federal funds rate will be that far in advance. . You know, I, I would say again that I think that, over time, the balance of risks, as we move from very, you know—from interest rates that are effectively zero now to 5 percentage points with, with an SEP calling for additional hikes—I think we’ve moved much closer to our destination, which is that sufficiently restrictive rate, and I think that means by—almost by definition that the—that the risks of, of sort of overdoing it and under, underdoing it are, are getting closer to being in balance. I still think, and my, my colleagues agree, that, that the risks to inflation are to the upside still. So we don’t—we don’t think we’re there with inflation yet because we’re just looking at the data. And if you look at the—at the full range of, of inflation data, particularly the core data, you just—you just aren’t seeing a lot of progress over the last year. Headline, of course, inflation has come down materially, but, as you know, we look at core [inflation] as a better indicator of where inflation overall is going. Sufficiently—so I think, you know, what, what we’d like to see is credible evidence that inflation is topping out and then beginning to come down. That’s, that’s what we want to see— of course that’s what we want to see. And I, I think it’s—it’s also—we understand that there are lags, but remember that it’s, it’s more than a year since financial conditions began tightening. I think it’s—I think the reason we’re, we’re comfortable pausing is that we are still—much of the tightening took place over last summer and later into the year. And I think it’s, it’s reasonable to think that some of that may come into effect. So we’re, you know—I think stretching out into a more moderate pace is appropriate to, to allow you to make that judgment of sufficiency, you know, more—with more data over time. . Yeah. So it’s a—it’s a challenging thing in, in economics. It’s, it’s sort of standard thinking that monetary policy affects economic activity with long and variable lags. Of course, these days, financial conditions begin to tighten well in advance of actual rate hikes. So if you—if you look back when we were lifting off, we started talking about lifting off—by the time we had lifted off, the two year [interest rate], which is a pretty good estimate of where [monetary] policy is going, had gone from 20 basis points to 200 basis points. So in that sense, tightening happens much sooner than it used to in a world where— where news was in newspapers and not, you know, not on, on the wire. So that’s, that’s different. But it’s still the case that what you see is interest sensitive spending is affected very, very quickly—so housing, and durable goods, and things like that. But broader demand, and spending, and, and asset values, and things like that—they just take longer. And you can pretty much find research to support whatever answer you would like on that. So there’s not any certainty or agreement in the profession on how long it takes. So, you know, then that makes it challenging, of course. So we’re, we’re looking at the calendar. We’re, we’re looking at what’s happening in the economy. We’re having to make these judgments. Again, it’s one of the main reasons why it makes sense to go at a slightly more moderate pace now as we seek that, that ultimate—I can’t point to—that ultimate endpoint. I can’t point to a specific data point. I think we’ll see it when we see inflation, you know, really, really flattening out reliably and then starting to soften. I think we’ll know that we’re—that it’s working. And, ideally, by, by taking a little more time, we won’t go well past the level where we need to go. . So it’s, it’s too early still to, to try to assess the full extent of what that might mean. And, you know, that’s something we’re going to be watching, of course. And, you know, if we were to see what, what we would view as significant tightening beyond what would normally be expected because of, of this channel, then, you know, we would factor that into account on, on—in, in making rate decisions. So that’s, that’s how we think about it. . Yeah. So, you know, we’ve—remember, we’ve—we’re two and a half years into this—or two and a quarter years into this. And forecasters, including Fed forecasters, have consistently thought that inflation was about to turn down and, you know, traditional—you know, typically forecasted that it would and been wrong. So I think if you—I think if you look at the—at core PCE inflation overall—look at it over the last six months—you’re just not seeing a lot of progress. It’s running, and it’s running at a level, you know, over 4½ percent—far above our, our target and not really, you know, moving down. We want to see it moving down decisively. That’s all. We’re, you know, of course, we’re going to get inflation down to 2 percent over time. We, we don’t want to do—we, we want to do that with the minimum damage we can to the economy, of course. But we have to get inflation down to 2 percent, and we will. And we just don’t see that yet. So, hence, you see today’s policy decision: both, both to write down further rate hikes by the end of this year but also to, you know, to take—to, to moderate somewhat the pace with which we’re moving. . Right. So I’m, I’m not going to comment on any particular paper, but I, I would say that the—I think the overall picture is that at the beginning in, you know, early 2021, inflation was really becoming from very strong demand for—largely for goods. People were still at home. They had money in the bank, and they wanted to spend—they spent a lot on goods. And, of course, at the same time—and because of that high demand, to some extent, supply chains got all snarled up. So prices went way up. Inflation went way up. So that was the, the origin, and it wasn’t really particularly about the labor market or wages. But as you—as you moved into—through ’21, into ’22, and now in ’23, I think many, many analysts believe that it will be important—an important part of getting inflation down, especially in the nonhousing services sector, to getting wage inflation back to a level that is sustainable, that is consistent with 2 percent inflation. We actually have seen wages broadly move down but just at a quite gradual pace. So— and that’s, you know, that’s a little bit of the finding of the Bernanke paper with Blanchard of a few weeks ago, which is very consistent with, with what I, I would think. . So I, I don’t want to deal with, with hypotheticals about different ways data might move. And so, we, you know—we of course—we’re not—we don’t go out of our way to surprise markets or the public. At the same time, our main focus has to be on getting the policy right. And that’s, that’s what we’re doing here, and that’s what we’ll do for the upcoming meetings. I will say the July meeting will be “live,” and we’ll just have to see. I think you’ll, you’ll see the data, you’ll hear Fed people talking about it, and, and markets will have to make a— make a judgment. . You know, I, I think if you look at—if, if you just look at—I’ll just point you to the forecast. So inflation is running—core PCE inflation is running at about 4½, a little higher than 4½ percent. And the, the median FOMC participant thinks it will go down to 3.9 on a 12 month basis. This is by the end of this year. So that’s expecting pretty substantial progress. That’s, that’s a pretty significant decline for half a year. So that’s, that’s the forecast. You know, we’ll—we do try to be transparent in our reaction function. We’re, we’re committed to getting inflation down. And that’s the number one thing. So that’s how I think about it. . So let me say, first of all, on the Treasury part of it—if I can talk about that and then go back to the balance sheet. So on that—of course, we’ve been very focused on that for a couple of months, as everyone has. [The] Treasury has laid out its borrowing plans publicly. I think we all saw—I saw the Secretary’s comments yesterday to the effect that [the] Treasury has consulted widely with market participants about how to avoid market disruption and that they’re going to watch carefully for that. So that’s, that’s from the Treasury, which actually sets the, you know, the, the borrowings. At the Fed, we’ll be monitoring market conditions carefully as the Treasury refills the, the TGA. The adjustment process is very likely to involve both a reduction in the RRP facility and also in reserves. It’s really hard to say at the—at the beginning of this which will be—which will be greater. We are starting at a very high level of reserves—and still elevated over RRP take up, for that matter—so we don’t think reserves are likely to become scarce in the near term or even over the course of the year. So that’s, that’s—that’s the—that’s the Treasury part of the answer. We will, of course, continue to monitor conditions in money markets, and we’re prepared to make adjustments to make sure that, that monetary policy transmission works. Was there another part of your question? . So we, we have a number of—I would say the [ON] RRP [facility] doesn’t look like it’s, it’s pulling money out of—out of the banking system. It’s actually been shrinking here lately. So I don’t think—that’s not something, something we’ve thought about a lot over time. It doesn’t really look like that’s, that’s something that we would do. I think it’s—I think it’s a tool that we have. If we want to use it, we can. There are other tools we can—we can use to address money market issues. But I wouldn’t say that that’s something that’s likely that we would do in the near term. . So certainly housing—very interest sensitive, and it’s the first place, really, or one of the first places, that’s either helped by low rates or, or that is held back by, by higher rates. And we certainly saw that over the course of the last year. We now see housing putting in a bottom and maybe even moving up a little bit. You know, we’re watching that situation carefully. I do think we—we will see rents, rents and, and house prices filtering into, into housing services inflation. And I, I don’t see them coming up quickly. I, I do see them kind of—kind of wandering around at a relatively low level now, and that’s appropriate. . Well, I think we, we look at everything. We don’t just look at housing. So I think, you know, the way it works is the individual participants sit in their offices all over the country, and they write down their forecast and—including their most likely forecasts—including their rate forecast. And then they send it in on Friday afternoon, and we cumulate it, and then we publish it for you. So that’s how—that’s how they do that. Well, I don’t know that housing is, is itself going to be driving the rates picture, but it’s part of it. . I don’t do that. That’s really not my job. We—we hope and expect that other policymakers will respect our independence on, on monetary policy. And we don’t see ourselves as, as, you know, the judges of appropriate fiscal policy. I will say, and many of my predecessors have said, that we’re on an unsustainable fiscal path and, and that needs to be addressed over time. But I think trying to get into, into that with lawmakers would be—would be kind of inappropriate, given our independence and our need to stick to our knitting. . No. Under no circumstances. . You know, I—I would just say it this way. I continue to think—and this really hasn’t changed—that there is a path to getting inflation back down to 2 percent without having to see the kind of sharp downturn and, and large losses of employment that we’ve seen in so many past instances. It’s, it’s possible. A—in a way, a strong labor market is—that, that gradually cools could, could aid that along—it could aid that along. But I, I guess I want to come back to the, the main thing, which is, though, simply this. We, we see—the Committee— as you can see from the SEP, the Committee is completely unified in the need to get inflation down to 2 percent and will do whatever it takes to get it down to 2 percent over time. That is our plan. And, you know, we, we understand that allowing inflation to get entrenched into the—in the U.S. economy is the thing that we cannot, cannot allow to happen for the benefit of today’s workers and families and businesses but also for the future. Getting price stability back and, and restored will benefit generations of people as long as it’s sustained. And it really is the bedrock of the economy. And, and you should understand that that is our top priority. . Sure. So, you know, if you look two and three years out with, with the forecast—first of all, I wouldn’t—I wouldn’t put too much weight on forecasts even one year out because they’re, they’re so highly uncertain. But what they’re showing is that as inflation comes down in the—in the forecast, if you don’t lower interest rates, then real rates are actually going up, right? So just to maintain a real rate, the nominal rate at that point—two years out, let’s say—should come down just to maintain real rates. And if—and actually, you know, since we’re, we’re probably going to—we’re, we’re having real rates that are going to have to be meaningfully positive and significantly. So for us to get inflation down, that probably means— that, that certainly means that, that it will be appropriate to cut rates at such time as inflation is coming down really significantly. And again, we’re talking about a couple of years out. I think, as, as anyone can see, not a single person on the Committee wrote down a rate cut this year, nor do I think it is at all likely to be appropriate, if you think about it. Inflation has not really moved down. It has—it has not so far reacted much to our—to our existing rate hikes. And so we’re going have to keep at it. . So we are, of course, worried about—there are—there are long  standing differences in racial and ethnic groups across, across our labor market. That’s a factor that we don’t—we can’t really address with our tools. But we do consider that when we’re thinking about what constitutes maximum employment—it is, for us, a broad and inclusive goal. And so we do watch that. But remember, all unemployment, including Black unemployment, has been bouncing around right near historic lows—historic modern lows here. So we’re still talking about, I mean, what is as strong a labor market as we’ve seen in, you know, a half  century here in the United States. So overall unemployment of 3.7 percent is, is higher—three  tenths higher than it was measured to be at the last—a month ago. But, still, it’s extraordinarily low. And so it’s a very, very tight labor market. . I wouldn’t say—that’s, you know—as a factual matter, that’s correct. We do need to see, you know, rents bottom out here or at least stay quite low in terms of their increases because we want—we want the, you know, we want inflation to come down. And rental is, is a very large part of the CPI—about a third—and it’s about half of that for the PCE. So it’s important. And so we’re—it’s something that we’re watching very carefully. It’s part of the overall picture. I wouldn’t say it’s the decisive part, but take a step back. What you see is— look at—look at core inflation over the past six months, a year. You’re just not seeing a lot of progress—not the kind of progress we want to see. And that, that’s—it’s hard to avoid that. And, you know, the Committee—people on the Committee—the median went up significantly, so that the median participant now thinks that core PCE inflation on a 12 month basis will be 3.9 percent this year. So, once again, every year for the past three years, it’s gone up over the course of the year, and that’s doing that again. So we see that, and we see that inflation forecasts are coming in low again, and we see that—that that tells us that we need to do more. And so we’re—that’s why you see the SEP with—where it is. . So wages will continue to increase. So we, we, you know—what we’re talking about is having wage increases still at a very strong level but at a level that’s consistent with 2 percent inflation over time. And so I, I think we’ve seen some progress—all, all of the major measures of wages have, have moved down from extremely elevated—not extremely elevated—highly elevated levels a year or so ago, and they’re, they’re moving back down but, but quite gradually. And, and, you know, we want to see that, that process continue gradually. Of course, it’s great to see wage increases, particularly for people at the lower end of the income spectrum. But we want that as part of the process of getting inflation back down to 2 percent, which benefits everyone. I mean, inflation hurts those same people more than anyone else. People on a fixed income are hurt the worst, and the fastest, by high inflation. . So the topic of wages in the labor market and dynamics in the labor market could—is about as central a topic to our discussions as, as anything. I mean, it’s, it’s very—labor economics, you know, and the labor market are utterly central. You know, it’s half of our mandate. So we spend a lot of time talking about that. I think, you know, we—there, there are structural issues that are really not for the Fed. And so we don’t spend a lot of time— although we take notice of, of what’s going on, but we’re not, you know—we’re not involved in discussions or debates over, over strikes and things like that. But we—you know, we, we look, and we see what’s going on. And, you know, we’re making judgments about what it will take to get inflation down to 2 percent in the aggregate. And as I said, don’t think that was about—I didn’t—most folks would say now it wasn’t really about that—about wages at the beginning. And it’s becoming more about that as we—as we get into really service sector inflation, which is the part of the economy where we have seen the least progress. . So I’m trying to think where to start. I’ll start with commercial real estate. We—of course, we’re watching that situation very carefully. There’s a substantial amount of commercial real estate in the banking system. A, a large part of it is in smaller banks. It’s well distributed—to the extent it’s well distributedthen, then the system could, could take losses. We do expect that there will be losses, but they’ll be—they’ll be banks that have concentrations, and those banks will experience larger losses. So we’re well aware of that. We’re monitoring it carefully. You know, it feels like—it feels like something that will be around for some time, as opposed to, you know, something that will suddenly hit and, and, you know, work its way into systemic risk. In terms of nonbank financials—financial sector—there’s been a ton of work. And, you know, clearly in the—in the pandemic, it really was—it was the nonbank financial sector where, where issues really arose. And, you know, there’s a lot of work going on in—with the Administration, in particular, leading that to try to address issues in the Treasury market and, and in all kinds of areas in the nonbank financial market. And—but, you know, our jurisdiction at the Fed is over banks—actually bank holding companies and some banks. So that’s, that’s really our main focus. You know, in terms of the events of March—as I mentioned earlier, we will be carefully monitoring that situation. You know, our, our job generally involves worrying about a lot of things that may go wrong, and that would include the banks. It might be hard for me to identify something that we don’t worry about rather than that we do worry about. So we’re watching those things very carefully. And as we see things unfold—as we see what’s happening with credit conditions and, and also all the individual banks that are out there, you know, we’ll be able to take, to the extent it’s appropriate, we can take, if they’re macroeconomic implications, we can take that into account in our rate setting. And so I guess that’s what I would say. . So that’s—and, and I was—I guess I meant to address that by saying as we—as we watch, we’ll see what’s happening. And if we—if we’re seeing the kind of tightening of conditions that, that you could be referring to, then we can factor that—because really, we’re—we use our—our rate tool is, is, you know, is—it really has macroeconomic purposes. So we’ll, we’ll take that into account. Of course, we have responsibility for financial stability as well. And that also is a factor that we’re always going to be considering. Thank you very much.

****FOMCpresconf20230726

. Good afternoon. My colleagues and I remain squarely focused on our dual mandate to promote maximum employment and stable prices for the American people. We understand the hardship that high inflation is causing, and we remain strongly committed to bringing inflation back down to our 2 percent goal. Price stability is the responsibility of the Federal Reserve. Without price stability, the economy doesn’t work for anyone. In particular, without price stability, we will not achieve a sustained period of strong labor market conditions that benefit all. Since early last year, the FOMC has significantly tightened the stance of monetary policy. Today we took another step by raising our policy interest rate ¼ percentage point, and we are continuing to reduce our securities holdings at a brisk pace. We’ve covered a lot of ground, and the full effects of our tightening have yet to be felt. Looking ahead, we will continue to take a data dependent approach in determining the extent of additional policy firming that may be appropriate. I’ll have more to say about monetary policy after briefly reviewing economic developments. Recent indicators suggest that economic activity has been expanding at a moderate pace. Growth in consumer spending appears to have slowed from earlier in the year. Although activity in the housing sector has picked up somewhat, it remains well below levels of a year ago, largely reflecting higher mortgage rates. And higher interest rates and slower output growth also appear to be weighing on business fixed investment. The labor market remains very tight. Over the past three months, job gains averaged 244,000 jobs per month, a pace below that seen earlier in the year but still a strong pace. The unemployment rate remains low at 3.6 percent. There are some continuing signs that supply and demand in the labor market are coming into better balance. The labor force participation rate has moved up since last year, particularly for individuals aged 25 to 54 years. Nominal wage growth has shown some signs of easing, and job vacancies have declined so far this year. While the jobs to workers gap has narrowed, labor demand still substantially exceeds the supply of available workers. Inflation remains well above our longer run goal of 2 percent. Over the 12 months ending in May, total PCE prices rose 3.8 percent  excluding the volatile food and energy categories, core PCE prices rose 4.6 percent. In June, the 12 month change in the consumer price index, or CPI, came in at 3.0 percent, and the change in the core, core CPI, was 4.8 percent. Inflation has moderated somewhat since the middle of last year. Nonetheless, the process of getting inflation back down to 2 percent has a long way to go. Despite elevated inflation, longer term inflation expectations appear to remain well anchored, as reflected in a broad range of surveys of households, businesses, and forecasters, as well as measures from financial markets. The Fed’s monetary policy actions are guided by our mandate to promote maximum employment and stable prices for the American people. My colleagues and I are acutely aware that high inflation imposes significant—significant hardship, as it erodes purchasing power, especially for those least able to meet the higher costs of essentials like food, housing, and transportation. We’re highly attentive to the risks that high inflation poses to both sides of our mandate, and we are strongly committed to returning inflation to our 2 percent objective. At today’s meeting, the Committee raised the target range for the federal funds rate by ¼ percentage point, bringing the target range to 5¼ to 5½ percent. We are also continuing the process of significantly reducing our securities holdings. With today’s action, we’ve raised our policy rate by 5¼ percentage points since early last year. We have been seeing the effects of our policy tightening on demand in the most interest rate–sensitive sectors of the economy, particularly housing and investment. It will take time, however, for the full effects of our ongoing monetary restraint to be realized, especially on inflation. In addition, the economy is facing headwinds from tighter credit conditions for households and businesses, which are likely to weigh on economic activity, hiring, and inflation. In determining the extent of additional policy firming that may be appropriate to return inflation to 2 percent over time, the Committee will take into account the cumulative tightening of monetary policy, the lags with which monetary policy affects economic activity and inflation, and economic and financial developments. We will continue to make our decisions meeting by meeting, based on the totality of the incoming data and their implications for the outlook for economic activity and inflation, as well as the balance of risks. We remain committed to bringing inflation back to our 2 percent goal and to keeping longer term inflation expectations well anchored. Reducing inflation is likely to require a period of below trend growth and some softening of labor market conditions. Restoring price stability is essential to set the stage for achieving maximum employment and stable prices over the longer run. To conclude: We understand that our actions affect communities, families, and businesses across the country. Everything we do is in service to our public mission. We at the Fed will do everything we can to achieve our maximum employment and price stability goals. Thank you, and I look forward to your questions. . So we haven’t made a decision to go to every other meeting. It’s not something we’ve looked at. We’re going to be going meeting by meeting, and as we go into each meeting, we’re going to be asking ourselves the same questions. So we haven’t made any decisions about, about any future meetings, including the pace at which we’d consider hiking. But we’re going to be assessing the need for further tightening that may be appropriate—you read the language—“to return inflation to 2 percent over time.” I would say that the intermeeting data came in broadly in line with expectations: Economic activity remained resilient, job creation remains strong while cooling a bit, and the June CPI report actually came in a bit better than expectations for a change. And the June CPI report, of course, was welcomed, but it’s only one report, one month’s data. We hope that inflation will follow a lower path, as was—that will be consistent with the CPI reading, but we don’t know that, and we’re just going to need to see more data. So, what are we going to be looking at? Really, it will be the broader, the whole broader picture, and starting with—we’re looking for moderate growth, right? We’re looking for supply and demand through the economy coming into better balance, including, in particular, in the labor market. We’ll be looking at inflation. We’ll be asking ourselves, does this whole collection of data, do we assess it as suggesting that we need to raise rates further? And if we make that conclusion, then we will go ahead and raise rates. So that’s how we’re thinking about the next meeting and, you know, how we’re thinking about meetings going forward potentially, but, you know, we’re now mainly thinking about the next meeting. I will also say, since we’re talking about it, between now and the September meeting, we get two more job reports, two more CPI reports. I think we have an ECI report coming later this week—which is [an] employment compensation index—and lots of data on economic activity. All of that information is going to inform our decision as we go into that meeting. I would say it is certainly possible that we would raise funds again at the September meeting if the data warrant it, and I would also say it’s possible that we would choose to hold steady at that meeting. We’re going to be making careful assessments, as I said, meeting by meeting, and I’ll close by saying we’ve raised the federal funds rate now by 525 basis points since March 2022. Monetary policy, we believe, is restrictive and is putting downward pressure on economic activity and inflation. . I’m just going to go back to what I said. We, we—you know, that’s the question. We have eight weeks now until the September meeting, and all that data that I recited, we’re going to be looking at all that and making that assessment then. And it really—we did have the one good reading, and, of course, we welcome that. But it’s just one reading, as everybody knows. And, and, you know, we’ve seen—we’ve seen this before in the data. Many forecasts call for, for rates—for, for inflation to remain low, but we just don’t know that until we see the data. So we’ll be focusing on that. . Yeah. So I would say it this way: The overall resilience of the economy, the fact that, that we’ve been able to achieve disinflation so far without any meaningful negative impact on the labor market, the strength of the economy—overall, that’s a good thing. It’s good to see that, of course. It’s also—you see consumer, consumer confidence coming up and things like that. That will support activity going forward. But you’re, you’re right, though. At the margin, stronger growth could lead, over time, to higher inflation, and that would require an appropriate response for monetary policy. So we’ll be watching that carefully and seeing how it evolves over time. . So if you go back to what we’re trying to do here, we’re trying to achieve a stance of policy that’s sufficiently restrictive to bring inflation down to 2 percent. At the last meeting, we wrote down our individual estimates of that would take—of what that would take, and the median of that was, was an additional two rate hikes. So I would say, we looked at the interim intermeeting data and, as I mentioned, broadly consistent, not perfectly consistent, but broadly consistent with expectations. And, as a result, we went ahead and, and took another step. And that’s, you know, a labor market that continues to be strong but, but gradually slowing. I mentioned that the inflation report was actually a little better than expected, but, you know, we’re, we’re going to be careful about taking too much signal from, from a single reading. And, you know, growth came in stronger than expected. So that’s how we look at it, and, and so we did take that step today. . So it’s hard to pick the pieces apart and say, you know, how much of this and how much of that. You know, we’ll be looking at everything. And, you know, we’ll, of course, we’ll be looking to see whether the signal from June’s CPI is replicated or, or the opposite of replicated or whether it’s somewhere in the middle. We’ll be looking at the growth data. We’ll be looking at the labor market data very closely, of course, and making an overall judgment about that. It’s the totality of the data, I think, but with a particular focus on, on making progress on inflation. . So I’m just going to tell you again what we’re going to do. In September, we’re going to look at, at two additional job reports, two additional CPI reports, lots of activity data, and that’s what we’re going to look at, and we’re going to make that decision then. And that decision could, could mean another hike in, in September, or it could mean that we decide to maintain at that level. And, again, the question we’re going to be asking ourselves is, is the overall signal one that we need to do more, that we need to tighten further? And if we get that signal, whenever we get it, then—and that’s the collective judgment of the Committee— then we will move ahead. If we don’t, you know, then, then we’ll have the option of maintaining policy at that level, but it’s, it’s, you know, it’s really dependent so much on the data, and we just don’t have it yet. . So I guess I’d say it this way: First, it is—it is a good thing that headline inflation has come down so much, because that’s really what the public experiences. And, and I would say that having headline inflation move down that much almost creates a—it will strengthen the broad sense that, that the public has that inflation is coming down, which will in turn, we hope, help inflation continue to move down. So you are really—sorry, your question was? . So I guess I would put it this way. We, we—I’d say it this way: It’s really a question of, how do you balance the two risks, the risk of doing too much or doing too little? And, you know, I would say that, you know, we’re coming to a place where, where there really are risks on both sides. It’s hard to say exactly whether, whether they’re in balance or not, but as our—as our stance has become more restrictive and inflation moderates, we do increasingly face that risk. But, you know, we, we need to see that inflation is durably down that far, you know. As you know, we think, and most economists think, that core inflation is actually a better signal of, of where headline inflation is going, because headline inflation is affected greatly by volatile energy and food prices. So we would want core inflation to be coming down, because that’s what we think—that’s—core is signaling where headline is going to go in the future. And core inflation is still pretty elevated, you know? There’s reason to think it can come down now, but it’s, it’s still quite elevated, and so we think we need to stay on task, and we think we’re going to need to hold, certainly, hold policy at a restrictive level for some time. And we need to be prepared to raise further if that—if we think that’s appropriate. . So it is—it is a very positive thing that, actually, the unemployment rate is the same as it was when we lifted off in March of ’22, at 3.6 percent. So that’s a real blessing in that we’ve been able to achieve some disinflation, and we don’t seek to it. It’s not that we’re aiming to, to raise unemployment, but I would just say, the historical record—we have to be honest about the historical record, which does suggest that when central banks go in and slow the economy to bring down inflation, the result tends to be some softening in labor market conditions. And so that is still the, the likely outcome here. And, you know, we hope that that’s as little as possible, but we have to be honest that that is—that is the likely outcome. The worst outcome for everyone, of course, would be not to deal with inflation now, not get it done. Whatever the short term social costs of getting inflation under control, the longer  term social costs of failing to do so are greater, and the historical record is very, very clear on that. If you go through a period where inflation expectations are not anchored, inflation is volatile, it interferes with people’s lives and with economic activity, and, you know, that’s the— that’s the thing we, we really need to avoid and will avoid. . So I’ll just say again, the broader picture of what we want to see is, we want to see easing of supply constraints and normalization of pandemic related distortions to demand and supply. We want to see economic growth running at moderate or modest levels to help ease inflationary pressures. We want to see continued restoration of supply and demand balance, particularly in the labor market. And all of that should lead to declining inflationary pressures. Now what we see is, we see those pieces of the puzzle coming together. And we’re seeing evidence of those things now, but I would—I would say that what, what our eyes are telling us is that policy has not been restrictive long, restrictive enough for long enough to have its full desired effects. So we intend, again, to keep policy restrictive until we’re confident that inflation is coming down sustainably to our 2 percent target, and we’re prepared to further tighten if that is appropriate. And we think the process, you know, still probably has a, a long way to go. . Well, I think—we think, you know, today’s rate hike was appropriate, and I think we’re going to be looking at the incoming data to inform our decision at the next meeting about, is the incoming data telling us that we need to do more? And if it does tell us that—collectively, if that’s our view—then we will do more. . So a more gradual pace doesn’t go immediately to [moving] every other meeting. It could be two out of three meetings, right? It could be—it just means if you’re slowing down, the point really was to slow down the decision cycle as, as we get closer and closer to, we think, our destination. And I wouldn’t want to go automatically to [moving] every other meeting, because I just don’t think that’s—we don’t—I think it’s not an environment where we want to provide a lot of forward guidance. There’s a lot of uncertainty out there. We just want to keep moving at what we think is the right pace, and I do think it makes all the sense in the world to slow down as we now make these finely judged decisions, and so that’s what we did. And so I, I think it’s possible. I mentioned it before. It’s possible that we would move at consecutive meetings—we’re not taking that off the table—or we might not. It’s really going to depend on what the data tell us. That’s the best we can do. . I think we’re—look, I think we’re going to—we’re going to make a decision about the next meeting, and then we’re going to make a decision about the one after that. And I think it’ll sort itself out. . So there’s a long running debate about the lags between changes in financial conditions and the response to those changes from economic activity and inflation, right? So we know that in the modern era, financial conditions move in anticipation of our decisions, and that has clearly been the case in this cycle. So, in a sense, the clock starts earlier than it—than it used to. But that doesn’t necessarily change the process from that point on, and it’s not clear that it has. We also—this is—I’ll tell you what we know and then what we don’t know. We know that financial conditions affect economic activity and inflation with a lag that can be long and variable, or lags, plural, that can be long and variable—a lot of uncertainty around the length of the lags. And, by the way, that’s just one component of the broader uncertainty that we face. So I’ll tell you how I—how I think about this. First, the first thing to say is, we’re determined to bring inflation down to 2 percent over time, and we will use our tools to do that. No one should doubt that. I would look at it this way, though. The real federal funds rate is now in meaningfully positive territory. If you take the nominal federal funds rate, subtract the mainstream estimate of near term inflation expectations, you get a real federal funds rate that is well above most estimates of the longer term neutral rate. So I would say, monetary policy is restrictive, more so after today’s decision, meaning that it is putting downward pressure on economic activity and inflation. We’ll keep monetary policy restrictive until we think it’s not appropriate to do so. So that’s how I think about it. I mean, if I sum it up, I would say: We’ve come a long way. We are resolutely committed to returning inflation to our 2 percent goal over time. Inflation has proved, repeatedly, has proved stronger than we and other forecasts—forecasters have expected, and at some point, that may change. We have to be ready to follow the data, and given how far we’ve come, we can afford to be a little patient, as well as resolute, as we let this unfold. . So I guess that the SLOOS will come out early next week, and I would just say it’s broadly condition—consistent with what you would expect. You’ve got lending conditions tight and getting a little tighter. You’ve got weak demand, and, you know, it, it gives a picture of pretty tight credit conditions in the economy. I think it’s really hard to tease out whether—how much of that is from this source or that source, but I think what matters is, the overall picture is of tight and tightening lending conditions. And that’s, that’s what the SLOOS will say. . Yeah. So, interesting question. So let me start by saying that the inflation surge that we saw in the pandemic resulted from a collision of elevated demand and, and constrained supply, both of which followed from the unprecedented features of the pandemic and the response from fiscal and monetary policy. And we’ve always expected that the disinflationary process would stem from, both from the normalization of those broad pandemic  related supply and demand conditions and from restrictive, restrictive monetary policy, which would help return the balance between supply and demand by restraining demand. And we think that’s broadly what we’re—what we’re seeing. So to go, break it down a little further: Of course, headline inflation has come down sharply from elevated levels as energy and food prices have come down, mostly due to [a] reversal of the effects [on those prices that resulted] from the war in Ukraine. And that’s, that’s a good thing, and the public experiences that, as I mentioned earlier. For core inflation, I’d say there also—there has been a role for, for most—for, for both factors, both that I mentioned. Clearly, for goods, normalization of supply conditions is playing an important role, as is the reversal, the beginning of the reversal, of spending—back into services and away from goods. And take autos as an example. The combination of an increase in sales and inventories, while, while vehicle inflation has decelerated, points to a substantial role for supply, but there’s also a role for demand, as, you know, the loans and things like that are more expensive. So they’re both working there. Housing services inflation now starts to move down. Clearly, higher rates have, have slowed the housing market. You know, I would say, monetary policy is working about as we expect, and we think—we think it’ll play an important role going forward, in particular in nonhousing services, where, really, we think that’s, that’s where the labor market will come in as a very, very important factor. So we think both of those—both of those sources of disinflation are playing an important role. . I think monetary policy is going to be important going forward because we, we’re sort of reaping now the benefits of the—of the reversal of some of the very specific pandemic things. We’re seeing that with goods, in particular, with supply chains and shortages moving, and we’re seeing—so I think going forward, monetary policy will be important, particularly in that, in the sector, in the nonhousing services sector. . So I think that, as it relates to goods, it’s really an indication that supply chains and, and shortages are easing. And so, what was the first part of it? . I don’t—I don’t think we’re targeting wage inflation. I think what we’re—what we’re looking for is a broad cooling in labor market conditions. And that’s what we’re seeing. So wages have actually been gradually moving down. They’re still at levels what would—that would be consistent over a long period of time with 2 percent inflation. Nonetheless, we’re making progress there. And by so many indicators, labor market demand is cooling. You can—you can look at surveys by workers and businesses who see that. You can look at the quits rate normalizing. You can look at job openings coming down. You can look at just job creation in the, the establishment survey has, you know—it’s still at a high level, but it was at, really, an extraordinarily high level for most of the last two years. So you see cooling, particularly in private sector, in the last, you know, in the last report. So I think we see that, and it’s happening at a gradual pace. So that’s actually not a bad thing, in a sense, because if, if what we see is a labor market, very strong demand for labor, which is really the engine of the economy—people are getting hired, many people going back to work, getting wages, spending money—and that’s really what’s driving the economy but that it’s gradually slowing, it’s gradually cooling, that’s a good prescription for getting where we want to get. . Not for us to comment on, on contract negotiations. Not our job, not our role. You know, we, we monitor these things, and we’ll keep an eye on them, but, really, that’s something that’s, that’s handled at that level and not— . I think you’d take both into account. I think you’d take everything into account when you start cutting rates. It would—it would depend on the whole, on a wide range of things. And when, when people are writing down rate cuts next year, you know, it just is a sense that inflation is coming down, and we’re comfortable that it’s coming down, and it’s time to start cutting rates. I think—but I mean, there’s a lot of uncertainty between what happens, you know, in the next meeting cycle, let alone the next year, let alone the year after that. So it’s, it’s hard to say exactly what happens there, what’s motivating people. . I’m not going—I’m not saying that at all. I’m not giving you any numerical guidance around that. I’m saying we would—we’d be comfortable cutting rates when we’re comfortable cutting rates, and that won’t be this year, I don’t think. It would be—you know, many people wrote down rate cuts for next year. I think the median was several for next year. And that’s just going to be a judgment that we have to make then, a full year from now, and it’ll be about how confident we are that inflation is, in fact, coming down to our 2 percent goal. . So it’s, it has been my view consistently that we do have a shot, and my base case is that we will be able to achieve inflation moving back down to our target without the kind of really significant downturn that results in high levels of job losses that we’ve seen in some past—in some past instances, many past instances of tightening that look like ours. That’s been my view. That’s, that’s still my view. And I think, you know, that that’s sort of consistent with, with what I see today. So—but it’s a long way from assured, and, and, you know, we have a lot left to go to see that happen. So the staff now has a noticeable slowdown in growth starting later this year in the forecast, but given the resilience of the economy recently, they are no longer forecasting a recession. I just want to note that it’s—that our staff produces its own forecast, which is independent of the forecasts that we as FOMC participants produce. Having an independent staff forecast as well as the individual participant forecasts is really a strength of our—of our process. There’s just a lot of, I think, constructive diversity of opinion that, that helps us make— informs our deliberations—helps us make, I hope, better decisions. . I wouldn’t use the term “optimism” about this yet. I would—I would say, though, that there’s a pathway, and, yes, that’s, that’s a good way to think about it. We’ve, we’ve seen so far the beginnings of disinflation without any real costs in the labor market. And that’s, that’s a really good thing. I would just also say the historical record suggests that there’s very likely to be some softening in labor market conditions. And consistent with having a soft landing, you would—you would have some softening in labor market conditions, and that’s still likely as we—as we go forward with this process. But it’s a good thing to date that we haven’t— we haven’t really seen that. We’ve seen softening through other—not through unemployment, not through higher unemployment. We’ve seen softening through, you know, job openings coming down part of the way back to more normal levels  the quits rate, so people are not quitting as much  we’ve seen participation—people coming in, and so labor supply has, has improved, which has lowered the temperature in the labor market, which was quite overheated, you know, going back a year or so. So we’re seeing that kind of cooling, and that’s, that’s very healthy, and, you know, we hope it continues. . So the idea that we would keep hiking until inflation gets to 2 percent—it would be a prescription [for a policy] of going way past the target. That’s, that’s clearly not the appropriate way to think about it. So, and in fact, if you look at our forecast, we, we—the median participant—and, again, these are forecasting out years, so take them with a grain of salt. But people are cutting rates next year because, because, you know, the federal funds rate is at a restrictive level now. So if we see inflation coming down credibly, sustainably, then we don’t need to be at a restrictive level anymore. We can, you know, we can move back to a—to a neutral level and then below a neutral level at a certain point. I think we would, you know, we would—we, of course, would be very careful about that. We’d really want to be sure that inflation is coming down in a sustainable level. And it’s hard to make—I’m not going to try to make a numerical assessment of when and where that would be. But that’s the way I would think about it, is you’d start—you’d stop raising long before you got to 2 percent inflation, and you’d start cutting before you got to 2 percent inflation, too, because we don’t see ourselves getting to 2 percent inflation until—you know, all the way back to 2—until 2025 or so. . So I don’t want to comment on any particular merger proposal, but I will say, things have settled down for sure out there. Deposit flows have stabilized. Capital and liquidity remain strong. Aggregate bank lending was stable quarter over quarter and is up significantly year over year. Banking sector profits generally are coming in strong this quarter. And, overall, the banking system remains strong and resilient. Of course, we’re still watching, you know, the situation carefully and monitoring, you know, monitoring conditions in, in the banking sector. In terms of the, the actual effect on—if you think of a particular set of banks that were, were affected because of their size and business model and things like that, that were more affected by the turmoil in March than others, it’s very hard, as I mentioned  it’s very hard to sort of tease out the effects on this very large economy of ours from them tightening. They may be tightening a little bit more, probably are, than other banks. The SLOOS has been telling us for more than a year that banking conditions are tightening. That process is ongoing, and that will restrain economic growth. So I think—I think we have to take a step back from “I can’t separate those anymore.” I think—I think, basically, we’re just looking at the overall picture, which is one of tightening credit conditions. And that’s, that’s going to restrain economic activity. It is restraining economic activity. So that’s how I would look at it. . So I think we—that goes—that’s—an expected result of tightening interest rate policy is that—is that bank credit conditions—bank lending conditions would tighten as well. And so the question is, is it more effective this time because of what happened in May? I just don’t think we know that. I think we’re looking at the current data in GDP, and we’re seeing strong spending. We’re seeing a strong economy, and it’s made us confident that we can go ahead and raise interest rates now for the third time since the March events. And I—it seems like the economy is weathering this well, but, of course, we’re watching it carefully and, and expect to continue to do that. . Well, [growth in nominal] wages in excess of inflation means [that increases in] real wages are positive. Again, that’s a great thing. Of course, we want that. We want people to have [gains in] real wages. But we want wages to be going up at a level that’s consistent with, with 2 percent inflation over time. As I mentioned, [increases in] nominal wages have been coming down gradually, and that’s what we want to see. We expect to see more of that. That’s just more of what’s consistent over a longer period of time. We don’t really think that, that wages were an important cause of inflation in the first year or so of the outbreak. But I would say that wages are probably an important issue going forward. Labor market conditions broadly are going to be an important part of, of getting inflation back down, and that’s why we think we need some further softening in labor market conditions. . Well, you know, we have a job assigned to us by Congress to get inflation under control. And we think the, the single most important thing we can do to benefit those very families, especially families at the lower end of the income spectrum, is to get inflation sustainably under control and restore price stability. We think that is the most important thing we can do now, and we’re determined to do that. And I would just point out that the people who are the most hurt by inflation right away are people who are on a low fixed income, who, you know, when you’re talking about travel or, you know, transportation costs, heating costs, clothing, food, things like that, those—if you’re just making it through each month on your paycheck and prices go up, you’re in trouble right away. Even middle class people have some resources and can absorb inflation. People, people on the lower end of the income spectrum have a harder time doing that. So we need—we need to get this done. And, you know, the record is clear that if we—if we take too long or if, if we don’t succeed, that the pain will only be greater. So that’s, that’s how I would explain what we’re doing. . Well, I mean, you could—“Was there doubt?” Look, I would say there’s a range of views on the Committee, and when you see the minutes in three weeks, you’ll see that. There’s a range of views about what we should do at this meeting and what we should do at the next meeting, and it’s a—it’s a process that we go through. Many times when we go into a meeting, the decision is not, you know, fundamentally in doubt. Nonetheless, we have the meeting, and some—some—some meetings are, you know, less uncertain than others, and I’ll just leave it at that. . So we monitor, of course, financial conditions, broad financial conditions. You’re right. It’s the dollar and equities, but—and, you know, we’re, of course, very focused on rates and our own policy. You know, we will—we’re going to use our policy tools to—working through financial conditions—to get inflation under control The implication is, you know, we will do what it takes to get inflation down, and in principle, that, that could mean that if financial conditions get looser, we have to do more. But what tends to happen, though, is, financial conditions get in and out of alignment with what we’re doing, and, and, ultimately, over time, we get where we need to go. . So that, that could happen. The question is, you know, is that consistent with, with—so if you think about both of them as normalization, imagine it’s a world where things are okay, and it’s time to bring rates down from what are restrictive levels to more normal levels. Normalization, in the case of, of the balance sheet, would be to reduce QT or to continue it, depending on where you are in the cycle. So they are two independent things. And, you know, really, the active tool of monetary policy is rates. But you can imagine circumstances in which it would be appropriate to have them working in what might be seen to be just different ways. But that wouldn’t be the case. . So that’s a very important thing. Yes. And yes to both sides of that. You know, yes, banks are now working to see that they are ready to use the discount window, and we are strongly encouraging them to do that—banks broadly. We did find, as you know, during the events of March and that, you know, that it’s a little clunkier. It can be a little clunkier and not as quick as it needs to be sometimes. So why not be in a situation where, where you’re just much more ready in case you—in case you need to access the discount window? . I think we’ve got a ways to go to get back to balance, really, for the reasons that you talked about. With existing homes, you know, there are many people who have low rate mortgages, and whereas they might want to sell in a normal situation, they’re not going to because they have such, so much, value in their mortgage, whch means that supply of existing homes is really, really tight, which is keeping prices up. On the other hand, there’s, you know, there’s a lot of supply coming on line now, and, and there are people coming in. A lot of the buyers are, are, you know, first time buyers coming in, buying at, you know, with these, you know, with these relatively elevated mortgage rates. But I think this will take some time to work through. Hopefully, more supply comes on line, and, you know, we, we work through it. We’re still living through the, you know, the aftermath of the—of the pandemic. . We are watching it, of course, very closely. And you’re right. The withdrawal from the Black Sea Grain Initiative does raise concerns about global food security, particularly for poorer countries that import a large share of their food. Grain prices did go up on this news, but they remain well below their peaks of last spring. And the moves that we’ve seen so far, I would say, are not expected to make a significant contribution to U.S. inflation. Of course, we will be watching that situation carefully. . Doesn’t. You wouldn’t say so looking at what we—what we know now. . Thanks very much.

****FOMCpresconf20230920

. Good afternoon, everyone. My colleagues and I remain squarely focused on our dual mandate to promote maximum employment and stable prices for the American people. We understand the hardship that high inflation is causing, and we remain strongly committed to bringing inflation back down to our 2 percent goal. Price stability is the responsibility of the Federal Reserve. Without price stability, the economy does not work for anyone. In particular, without price stability, we will not achieve a sustained period of strong labor market conditions that benefit all. Since early last year, the FOMC has significantly tightened the stance of monetary policy. We’ve raised our policy interest rate by 5¼ percentage points and have continued to reduce our securities holdings at a brisk pace. We’ve covered a lot of ground, and the full effects of our tightening have yet to be felt. Today, we decided to leave our policy interest rate unchanged and to continue to reduce our securities holdings. Looking ahead, we’re in a position to proceed carefully in determining the extent of additional policy firming that may be appropriate. Our decisions will be based on our ongoing assessments of the incoming data and the evolving outlook and risks. I will have more to say about monetary policy after briefly reviewing economic developments. Recent indicators suggest that economic activity has been expanding at a solid pace, and, so far this year, growth in real GDP has come in above expectations. Recent readings on consumer spending have been particularly robust. Activity in the housing sector has picked up somewhat, though it remains well below levels of a year ago, largely reflecting higher mortgage rates. Higher interest rates also appear to be weighing on business fixed investment. In our Summary of Economic Projections, or SEP, Committee participants revised up their assessments of real GDP growth, with the median for this year now at 2.1 percent. Participants expect growth to cool, with the median projection falling to 1.5 percent next year. The labor market remains tight, but supply and demand conditions continue to come into better balance. Over the past three months, payroll job gains averaged 150,000 jobs per month, a strong pace that is nevertheless well below that seen earlier in the year. The unemployment rate ticked up in August but remains low at 3.8 percent. The labor force participation rate has moved up since late last year, particularly for individuals aged 25 to 54 years. Nominal wage growth has shown some signs of easing, and job vacancies have declined so far this year. Although the jobs to workers gap has narrowed, labor demand still exceeds the supply of available workers. FOMC participants expect the rebalancing in the labor market to continue, easing upward pressures on inflation. The median unemployment rate projection in the SEP rises from 3.8 percent at the end of this year to 4.1 percent over the next two years. Inflation remains well above our longer run goal of 2 percent. Based on the consumer price index, or CPI, and other data, we estimate that total PCE prices rose 3.4 percent over the 12 months ending in August and that, excluding the volatile food and energy categories, core PCE prices rose 3.9 percent. Inflation has moderated somewhat since the middle of last year, and longer term inflation expectations appear to remain well anchored, as reflected in a broad range of surveys of households, businesses, and forecasters, as well as measures from financial markets. Nevertheless, the progress—process of getting inflation sustainably down to 2 percent has a long way to go. The median projection in the SEP for total PCE inflation is 3.3 percent this year, falls to 2.5 percent next year, and reaches 2 percent in 2026. The Fed’s monetary policy actions are guided by our mandate to promote maximum employment and stable prices for the American people. My colleagues and I are acutely aware that high inflation imposes significant hardship, as it erodes purchasing power, especially for those least able to meet the higher costs of essentials like food, housing, and transportation. We are highly attentive to the risks that high inflation poses to both sides of our mandate, and we’re strongly committed to returning inflation to our 2 percent objective. As I noted earlier, since early last year, we have raised our policy rate by 5¼ percentage points. We see the current stance of monetary policy as restrictive, putting downward pressure on economic activity, hiring, and inflation. In addition, the economy is facing headwinds from tighter credit conditions for households and businesses. In light of how far we have come in tightening policy, the Committee decided at today’s meeting to maintain the target range for the federal funds rate at 5¼ to 5½ percent and to continue the process of significantly reducing our securities holdings. We are committed to achieving and sustaining a stance of monetary policy that is sufficiently restrictive to bring inflation down to our 2 percent goal over time. In our SEP, FOMC participants wrote down their individual assessments of an appropriate path for the federal funds rate, based on what each participant judges to be the most likely—sorry—the most likely scenario going forward. If the economy evolves as projected, the median participant projects that the appropriate level of the federal funds rate will be 5.6 percent at the end of this year, 5.1 percent at the end of 2024, and 3.9 percent at the end of 2025. Compared with our June Summary of Economic Projections, the median projection is unrevised for the end of this year but has moved up by ½ percentage point at the end of the next two years. These projections, of course, are not a Committee decision or plan  if the economy does not evolve as projected, the path of policy will adjust as appropriate to foster our maximum employment and price stability goals. We will continue to make our decisions meeting by meeting, based on the totality of the incoming data and their implications for the outlook for economic activity and inflation, as well as the balance of risks. Given how far we have come, we are in a position to proceed carefully as we assess the incoming data and the evolving outlook and risks. Real interest rates now are well above mainstream estimates of the neutral policy rate, but we are mindful of the inherent uncertainties in precisely gauging the stance of policy. We’re prepared to raise rates further if appropriate, and we intend to hold policy at a restrictive level until we’re confident that inflation is moving down sustainably toward our objective. In determining the extent of additional policy firming that may be appropriate to return inflation to 2 percent over time, the Committee will take into account the cumulative tightening of monetary policy, the lags with which monetary policy affects economic activity and inflation, and economic and financial developments. We remain committed to bringing inflation back down to our 2 percent goal and to keeping longer term inflation expectations well anchored. Reducing inflation is likely to require a period of below trend growth and some softening of labor market conditions. Restoring price stability is essential to set the stage for achieving maximum employment and stable prices over the longer run. To conclude: We understand that our actions affect communities, families, and businesses across the country. Everything we do is in service to our public mission. We at the Fed will do everything we can to achieve our maximum employment and price stability goals. Thank you, and I look forward to your questions. . So I guess I would characterize the, the situation a little bit differently. So we decided to maintain the target range for the federal funds rate where it is—at 5¼ to 5½ percent—while continuing to reduce our securities holdings. And we say we’re committed to achieving and sustaining a stance of monetary policy that’s sufficiently restrictive to bring down inflation to 2 percent over time—we said that. But the fact that we decided to maintain the policy rate at this meeting doesn’t mean that we’ve decided that we have or have not at this time reached that—that stance of monetary policy that we’re seeking. If you looked at the SEP, as you—as you obviously will have done, you will see that a majority of participants believe that it is more likely than not that we will—that it will be appropriate for us to raise rates one more time in the two remaining meetings this year. Others believe that we have already reached that. So it’s, it’s something where we’re—by, by—we’re not making a decision by, by deciding to—about that question by deciding to just maintain the rate and await further data. . We’re not saying—yeah, no, no—clearly, we’re just—what we decided to do is maintain a policy rate and await further data. We want to see convincing evidence, really, that we have reached the appropriate level, and then, you know, we’re— we’ve—we’ve seen progress, and, and we welcome that. But, you know, we need to see more progress before we’ll be willing to—to reach that conclusion. . Right. So I would say it this way: First of all, interest rates—real interest rates are, are positive now. They’re meaningfully positive, and that’s a good thing. We need policy to be restrictive so that we can get inflation down to target. Okay. And we need— we’re going to need that to remain to be the case for some time. So I think, you know— remember that the—of course, the SEP is not a plan that is negotiated or discussed, really, as a plan. It’s a cumulation, really, and what you see are the medians. It’s a cumulation of individual forecasts from 19 people, and then what you’re seeing are the medians. So I wouldn’t want to, you know, bestow upon it the idea that, that it’s really a plan. But what it reflects, though, is that economic activity’s been stronger than we expected—stronger than I think everyone expected. And, and so what you’re—what you’re seeing is, this is what people believe, as of now, will be appropriate to achieve what we’re looking to achieve, which is progress toward our—toward our inflation goal, as you see in the SEP. . Yeah. So the proposal at the meeting was to—was to maintain our current policy stance, and, and I think there was obviously unanimous support for that. But this, of course, is an SEP meeting, and so people write down what they think. And you’ve got—you have some—you saw, I think—seven wrote down no hike at this—at this meeting—or between now and the end of the year. And I think 12 wrote down another single hike in one of the next two meetings that we have between the end of the year. So it wasn’t like we were arguing over that—people just stating their positions—and, really, what, what people are saying is, “Let’s see how the data come in.” You know, we, we want to see—you know what we want to see. We want to see that, that this, this—these good inflation readings that we’ve been seeing for the last three months—we want to see that it’s more than just three months, right? We want to see, you know—the, the labor market report that we received, the last one that we received, was a good example of what we do—of what we do want to see. It was a combination of, of, you know, of—across a broad range of indicators, continuing rebalancing of the labor market. So those are the two things—so those are our two mandate variables, and, and that’s, that’s the progress that we want to see. But I think people—they want to be convinced, you know—they want to be careful to—not to jump to a conclusion, really, one way or the other—but just be convinced that the data, you know, support that conclusion. And that’s why, given how far we’ve come and how quickly we’ve come, we’re actually in a position to be able to proceed carefully as we assess the incoming data and the evolving outlooks and risks and make these decisions meeting by meeting. . So, you know, you, you can make the argument that one hike one way or the other won’t matter. But, for us, we’re, we’re trying—obviously, as a group, it’s a pretty tight cluster of, of where we think that, that policy stance might be, but we’re always going to be learning from data. You know, we’ve learned all through the course of the last year that, actually, we needed to go further than we had thought. If you go back a year—and what we thought, what we wrote down—it’s actually gotten higher and higher. So we, we don’t really know until—and that’s why, again, we—we’re in a position to proceed carefully at this point. A year ago, we proceeded pretty quickly to get rates up. Now—now we’re fairly close, we think, to where we need to get. It’s, it’s just a question of reaching the right stance. I wouldn’t attribute huge importance to one hike in, in macroeconomic terms. Nonetheless, you know, we need—we need to get to a place where we’re confident that we have a stance that will bring inflation down to 2 percent over time. That’s what we need to get to, and we’ve been—you know, we’ve been moving toward it. As we’ve gotten closer to it, we’ve slowed the pace at which we’ve moved. I think that was appropriate. And now that we’re getting closer, we, we— again, we have the ability to proceed carefully. . So I, I guess I would point more to—rather than pointing to a sense of inflation having become more persistent, I wouldn’t think—that’s not—we’ve, we’ve seen inflation be more persistent over the course of the past year, but I wouldn’t say that’s something that’s appeared in the recent data. It’s more about stronger economic activity, I would say. So if, if I had to attribute one thing—again, we’re, we’re picking medians here and trying to attribute one explanation. But I think, broadly, stronger economic activity means, means rates— we have to do more with rates, and that’s what—that’s what that meaning is, is telling you. In terms of, of what the neutral rate can be—you know, we—we know it by its works. We only know it by its works, really. We can’t—we can’t—you know, the, the models and, and—that we use, you—ultimately, you only know when you get there and by, by the way the economy reacts. And, again, that’s another reason why we’re—why we’re moving carefully now, because, you know, there are lags here. So it, it may—it may, of course, be that the—that the neutral rate has risen. You do see people—you don’t see the median moving—but you do see people raising their estimates of, of the neutral rate, and it’s certainly plausible that the neutral rate is higher than, than the longer run rate. Remember—what we write down in the SEP is the longer run rate. It is certainly possible that, you know, that the—that the neutral rate at this moment is higher than that, and that—that’s part of the explanation for why the economy has been more resilient than, than expected. . Yes, of course. It is a—it is a good thing that we, we’ve seen now meaningful rebalancing in the labor market without an increase in unemployment, and that’s, that’s because we’re seeing that rebalancing in other places—in, for example, job openings and in the jobs–worker gap. You’re also seeing supply side things—so, so that’s happening. I would say, though, we still—I still think, and I think, broadly, people still think, that there will have to be some softening in the labor market that can come through more supply, as we’ve seen as well. Also, remember, the natural rate, we think, is, is coming down, which is a supply side thing, so that the, the gap between any given unemployment rate that’s lower than that and the natural rate comes down. That’s a way for supply—that’s a way for the labor market to achieve a better balance. So all of those things are happening. You’re right—in, in the median forecast, we don’t see a big increase in unemployment. We do see an increase, and—but that’s—that really is just “playing forward” the trends that we’ve been seeing. That is not guaranteed. There, there may come a time when unemployment goes up more than that, but that’s, that’s really what we’ve been seeing is, progress without higher unemployment for now. . No, no—I would not do that. I, I would just say—what, what would I say about that? I’ve always thought that the soft landing was, was a plausible outcome—that there was a path, really, to, to a soft landing. I’ve thought that, and I’ve said that since we lifted off. It’s also possible that, that the path has narrowed, and it’s widened, apparently. Ultimately, it—this may be decided by factors that are outside our control at the end of the day. But I do think it’s—I do think it’s possible. And, you know—I also think, you know, this is why we’re in a position to, to move carefully again. That—we, we will restore price stability. We, we know that we have to do that, and we know the public depends on us doing that, and we know that we have to do it so that we can achieve the kind of labor market that we all want to achieve, which is an extended period—sustained period of strong labor market conditions that benefit all. We know that. The fact that we’ve come this far lets us really proceed carefully, as I keep saying. So I think, you know, that’s, that’s the end we’re trying to achieve. I wouldn’t want to handicap the likelihood of it, though. It’s not up to me to do that. . I mean, yes—we, we understand that it’s a real rate that will matter and that needs to be sufficiently restrictive. And, again, I would say, you know—you know “sufficiently restrictive” only when you see it. You—it’s not something you can arrive at with confidence in a model or, or in various estimates, you know. And so what are we seeing? We’re, we’re seeing, you know, through a combination of the, you know, the unwinding of the pandemic related demand and supply distortions and monetary policy’s work in suppressing demand or, or, you know, alleviating very high demand—the combination of those two things is actually working. You’re seeing, you know, inflation coming down. It’s principally now in goods—also in housing services. You begin to see effects of it in nonhousing services as well. So I think—we think that that is working. And I, I think, you know—as we’ve said, we, we want to reach that—we want to reach something that we’re confident gets us to that level. And I think confidence comes from seeing, you know, enough data that you feel like, “Yes, okay, this feels like it—we can—we can, for now, decide that this is the right level and just agree to stay here.” We’re not permanently deciding not to go higher, but, but we would—let’s say, if we get to that level—and then the question is, how long do you stay at that level? And that’s a whole other set of questions. For now, the question is trying to find that level where we think we can stay there. And we haven’t—we haven’t gotten to a point of confidence about that yet. That’s, that’s what we’re—that’s, that’s the stage we’re at, though. . The decision that we make at, you know, at each meeting and, certainly, at the—at the last two meetings this year—it’s going to depend on the totality of all the data: so, the inflation data, the labor market data, the growth data, the, the balance of risks, and the other events that are happening out there. We’ll make—we take all of that into account, so I can’t really answer a hypothetical about one piece of that. It’ll—it’ll be trying to reach a judgment over whether we should move forward with another rate hike overall and whether that would increase our confidence that, that, yes, this is an appropriate move, and it will help, help us be more confident that we’ve gotten to the level that we need to get to. . No. When—so when I answer these questions about hypotheticals about, about cutting, I’m never intending to send a signal about timing  I’m just answering them as, as the question is expressed. So, so please—I, I wouldn’t want to be taken that way. Sorry— the first question was, is that how? Yeah, so we’re—as we go into next year, that’s the question we’ll be asking is—you know, taking into account lags and, and everything else we know about the economy and everything we know about monetary policy, the, the time will come at some point, and I’m not saying when, that it’s—that it’s appropriate to cut. Part of that may be that real rates are rising because inflation is coming down. Part of it just may be that—it’ll be all the factors that we see in the economy. And, you know, that time will certainly come at some point. And you—what you see is us writing down, you know, a year ahead, estimates of what that might be. And, you know, there’s—you know, there’s so much uncertainty around that. In, in— when we—in the moment, we’ll do what we think makes sense. No one will look back at this and say, “Hey, we made a plan.” It’s not like that at all. It’s—this is—these are estimates made a year in advance that are highly uncertain, and that’s how it is. . So on, on your first question—I mean, we’re looking at GDP very, very carefully to try to understand really what’s the direction of it—what’s, what’s driving it. And it’s, it’s a lot of consumer spending, you know. It’s been—the consumer’s been very robust in its—in spending. So that is, you know, that’s how we’re looking at it. Sorry, your second question was— . So I, I think the question will be—GDP is not our mandate, right? Maximum employment and price stability are the mandates. The question will be, is, is the level—is GDP—is the—is the heat that we see in GDP—is it really a threat to our ability to get back to 2 percent inflation? That’s going to be the question. It’s not—it’s not a question about GDP on its own. It’s, you—you know, you’re expecting to see the—this improvement, you know—continued rebalancing in the labor market and inflation moving back down to 2 percent in a sustainable way. We have to have confidence in that, and, you know, we’d be—we’d be looking at GDP just, just to the extent that it threatens one or both of those. . So there is a—there is a long list, and you hit some of them. But it— you know, it’s, it’s the strike, it’s government shutdown, resumption of student loan payments, higher long term rates, oil price shock. You know, you could—there are a lot of things that you can—you can look at. And, you know—so, what we try to do is assess all of them and, and handicap all of them. And, ultimately, though, there’s so much uncertainty around, around these things. I mean, to, to start with the strike—first of all, we absolutely don’t comment on the strike, as we have no view on the strike one way or the other. But we, we do have to make an assessment of its economic effects to do our jobs. So, you know, the, the thing about it is—so uncertain. It will depend. The economic effects—it could affect—you’ve looked—we’ve looked back at history—it could affect economic output, hiring, and inflation. But that’s really going to depend on how broad it is and how long it’s sustained for. And we—and then it also depends on how quickly production can make up for, for lost production. So none of those things are known right now. It’s very, very hard to know. So you just have to leave that uncertain. And, and we’ll be learning, I think, over the course of the next intermeeting period, much more about that. And the same is true for the others. We, we—I don’t know if you mentioned shutdown  I think of all of these as being on the list. We don’t comment on that. It hasn’t traditionally had much of a macroeconomic effect. You know, energy prices being higher—that’s—that is a significant thing. We—energy prices being up can affect spending. It can affect the consumer over time. A sustained period of higher—of higher energy prices can affect consumer expectations about inflation. We tend to look through short term volatility and look at—look at core inflation. But so the question is, how long are, are higher prices sustained? We have to—we have to take those macroeconomic effects into account as well. Those are—those are some of them. I’m not sure if I hit them all. But—I mean, ultimately, you know, you’re, you’re coming into this with an economy that appears to have significant momentum. And that’s, that’s what we start with. And we—but we do have this collection of risks that you mentioned. . To begin: A soft landing is a primary objective, and I did not say otherwise. I mean, that’s, that’s what we’ve been trying to achieve for all this time. The, the real point, though, is—the, the worst thing we can do is to fail to restore price stability, because the record is clear on that: If you, you don’t restore price stability, inflation comes back, and you go through—you can have a long period where the economy’s just very uncertain, and it will affect growth  it will affect all kinds of things. It can be a miserable period to have inflation constantly coming back and the Fed coming in and having to tighten again and again. So the best thing we can do for everyone, we believe, is to restore price stability. I think now, today, we actually—you know, we, we have the ability to be careful at this point and move carefully, and that’s what we’re planning to do. So we fully appreciate that—you know, the benefits of being able to continue what we see already, which is rebalancing in the labor market and inflation coming down without seeing, you know, an important, large increase in unemployment, which has been typical of other tightening cycles. So— . So if I—if I understood your question, it’s—I would say it this way: I think we knew from the time—from before when we lifted off, but certainly by the time we lift—we knew that bringing inflation back down was going to take, as I call it, the unwinding of these distortions to both supply and demand that happened because of the pandemic and the response. So that unwinding was going to be important. In addition, monetary policy was going to help. It was going to help supply side heal by, by cooling demand off and, just in general, better aligning supply with demand. So those two forces were always going to be important. I think it’s very hard to pull them apart. They work together. I, I do think both of them are at work now, and I think they’re at work in a way that shows you the progress that we—that we are seeing. . Well, forecasts are highly uncertain. Forecasting is very difficult. Forecasters are a humble lot with much to be humble about. But to get to, to your question, though—what’s happened is, growth has come in stronger, right? Stronger than expected—and that’s required higher rates. Unemployment, you know—you also see that the, the ultimate unemployment rate is not as high, but that—that’s really because of what we’ve been seeing in the labor market. We’ve seen more and more progress in the labor market without seeing significantly higher unemployment. So we’re, we’re continuing that trend. In terms of inflation, you, you are seeing—the last three readings are, are very good readings. It’s only three readings, you know. We—we’re well aware that we need to see more than three readings. But if you look at June, July, and August, you’re looking at, you know, really significant declines in core inflation, largely in the goods sector—also to some extent in housing services and just a little in nonhousing services. Those are the three buckets. Headline inflation, of course, has come way down, largely due to lower energy prices, some of which is now reversing. So I think—people should know that, that economic forecasting is very difficult, and these are highly uncertain forecasts. But these are—these are our forecasts. You know, they’re, they’re—we have very high quality people working on these forecasts, and I think they stand up well against other forecasters. But just the nature of the business is, the economy is very difficult to forecast. . Well, I, I think we have come very far very fast in, in the, the rate increases that we’ve made. And I think it was important at the beginning that we move quickly, and we did. And, and I think as we get closer to the rate that we think—the stance of monetary policy that we think is appropriate to bring inflation down to 2 percent over time, you know, the risks become more two sided, and the risk of overtightening and the risk of, of undertightening becomes more equal. And I think the, the natural, commonsense thing to do is, as you approach that, you move a little more slowly as you get closer to it. And that, that’s what we’re doing. So we’re, we’re taking advantage of the fact that we have moved quickly to move a little more carefully now as we—as we sort of find our way to, to the right level of restriction that we need to get inflation back down to 2 percent. . Sorry—yeah, I missed the first question. What was—missed what factors? . Base factors. Ah. Okay. So on that, we’re, you know, we’re looking at just monthly, right? You can look at just monthly readings and see what the increase was from the prior month. So you’re right—when you go back 3, 6, and 12 months, you get base factors. But we can—we can adjust for that. In terms of not getting data—you know, again, we don’t—we don’t comment on government shutdowns. It—it’s possible—if, if there is a government shutdown and it lasts through the, the next meeting, then it’s possible we wouldn’t— we wouldn’t be getting some of the data that we would ordinarily get, and we—you know, we would just have to deal with that. And I don’t know. It’s hard for me to say in advance how that would affect that meeting. It would depend on all kinds of factors that I don’t know about now. But it’s certainly a reality that, that that’s a possibility. . You know, yes. I mean, if you’re looking—if—we, we can tell how much inflation has gone up in a given month, right? And, you know, that’s what we’re looking at. And month by month, what’s the reading? And, you know, I think—I think what we’re really looking at is, there’s a tendency to look at, you know, shorter and shorter maturities, but they’re incredibly volatile, and they can be misleading. That’s why we look at 12 month [rates]. But I think, in this situation—where it looks like we’ve had a bit of a turn in inflation starting in June—we’re also looking at six months, and even three months, but really six months’ inflation. So you’re looking at it over that period and over longer periods. That—that’s the right way to go. And we don’t—we don’t need to be in a hurry to—in, in getting to a conclusion about what to do. We can let the data evolve. So— . Right. So, you know, energy prices are very important for the consumer. This, this can affect consumer spending. It certainly can affect consumer sentiment. I mean, gas prices are one of the big things that, that affects consumer sentiment. It, it really comes down to how persistent—how sustained these energy prices are. The reason why we look at core inflation, which excludes food and energy, is that energy goes up and down like that. And it doesn’t—energy, energy prices mostly, mostly don’t contain much of a signal about how tight the economy is, and hence don’t tell you much about where inflation’s really going. However, we’re well aware, though, that, that, you know, if energy prices increase and stay high, that’ll have an effect on spending. And, and it may have an effect on, on consumer expectations of inflation—things like that. That’s just things we have to monitor. . So, to, to finish my prior thought, I was saying that’s why we tend to look through energy moves that we—that we can see as, as short term volatility. You know, turning to consumer credit, you know—of course, we watch that carefully. Consumer distress— measures of distress among consumers were at historic lows quite recently, you know, after— during and after the, the pandemic. They’re now moving back up to normal. We’re, we’re watching that carefully. But, at this point, these, these readings are not at troublingly high levels. They’re, they’re just kind of moving back up to what was the typical [level] in the pre pandemic era. . So you’re right. You know, rates have moved up significantly. I think it’s always hard to say precisely, but it’s—most, most people do a common decomposition of the increase, and they’ll, they’ll—the view will be, it’s not—it’s not mostly about inflation expectations. It’s mostly about other things, you know—either term premium or real yields— and it’s, it’s hard to be precise about this. Of course, everyone’s got models that’ll give you a very precise answer, but they give you different answers. So—but, essentially, they’re, they’re moving up because—it’s not because of inflation. It’s because probably—it’ll probably have something to do with stronger growth, I would say—more, more supply of Treasuries. You know, the common explanations that you hear in the markets kind of make sense. . So on the supply point—of course, supply is very important over time in, in setting house prices and, and, for that matter, rents. And so—and supply is kind of structurally constrained. But in terms of, of where inflation’s going in the near term, though, as, as you obviously know, a lot of it is, is leases that are running off and then being re signed or re  leased at a level that’s, that’s not as—it won’t be that much higher. A year ago, it would have been much higher than it was a year before  now it may be below or at the same level. So as those leases are rolling over, we’re, we’re seeing what we expect, which is measured housing services inflation coming down. Your second question was the lock ins. How much is that affecting things, really? . I, I think we look at the—I would look at the lock in, the, the idea being that people are in, in very low mortgage—very low rate mortgages, and if—even if they want to move now, they—it would be hard because the new mortgage would be so expensive. And that’s explaining some of the—that’s one of the explanations for what’s happening broadly in the labor market. Would that play a role in, in our future decisions—in a—in a future tight— in a future loosening cycle about whether we would cut rates? No, I, I don’t think it would. I mean, I don’t think that’s—I, I think we’d be looking at, what, you know, fundamentally, what, what rates does the economy need? And, and, you know, in, in an emergency like the pandemic or during the Global Financial Crisis, you, you know, the, the—you have to cut rates to the point that—you have to do, do what you can to support the economy. So I wouldn’t—I wouldn’t think that that would be a reason for us not to do that. It’s not something we’re thinking about at all right now. But, down the road, I wouldn’t think so. . I, I wouldn’t say it that way. We’re not looking for a decrease in consumer spending. It’s, it’s a good thing that the economy’s strong. It’s a good thing that the economy has been able to hold up under, under the tightening that we’ve done. It’s a good thing that the labor market’s strong. The, the only concern—it, it just means this: If the economy comes in stronger than expected, that just means we’ll have to do more in terms of monetary policy to get back to 2 percent—because we will get back to 2 percent. Does that answer your question? . Well, that’s always a concern. I mean, concern number one is, is restoring price stability, because in the long run, that’s, that’s something we have to do so that we can have the kind of economy we really want, which is one with sustained period of tight labor market conditions that benefit all, as I—as I’ve said a couple times. So that, that said—of course, you know—we, we also now, given how far we’ve come with our rate hikes and how quickly we’ve come here, we do have the ability to be careful as we move forward because of that consideration. . So, what—I guess it’s fair—it’s fair to say that the economy has been stronger than many expected, given, given what’s been happening with, with interest rates. Why is that? Many candidate explanations—possibly—a number of them make sense. One, one is just that household balance sheets and business balance sheets have been stronger than we had understood, and so that, that spending has held up—and that kind of thing. We’re not sure about that. The savings rate for consumers has come down a lot. The question is whether that’s sustainable. That could—it could just mean that the—that the date of effect is, is later. It could also be that for other reasons, the neutral rate of interest is, is higher for—for various reasons. We don’t know that. It could also just be that policy hasn’t been restrictive enough for long enough. And it’s—there are many candidate explanations. We have to, in, in all this uncertainty, make policy, and I, you know, I feel like what we have right now is what’s still a very strong labor market—but that’s coming back into balance. We were making progress on inflation. Growth is strong. But I think by many forecasts—many, many, many forecasts call for growth to, to moderate over the course of the next year. So that’s where we are, and, you know, we have to—we have to deal with what comes. On your second question, which was— sorry, your second question was distributional, but can you—can you be a little clearer about that? . Yes. And so the point I would make there is that we’re trying to get inflation back down. The people who are most hurt by inflation are the people who are on a fixed income. If you’re a person who spends all of your income, you don’t really have any meaningful savings. You spend all your income on the basics of life—clothing, food, transportation, heating—the basics—and prices go up by 5, 6, 7 percent, you’re in trouble right away, whereas even, even middle class people have some savings and some ability to absorb that. So it is for those people as much as for anybody that we need to restore price stability, and, and we, we want to do it as quickly as possible. Obviously, we—we’d like to do that. We’d like the current trend to continue, which is that we’re making progress without seeing the kind of increase in unemployment that we’ve seen past—in past things. But you’re right, though. When we raise rates, people who are, you know, living on credit cards and, and borrowing are going to feel that more. They are. And, of course, people with, with lots of savings also have a—have a much lower marginal propensity to consume, and so they’re not going to—it’s not going to affect them as much. . So I, I don’t know about the quarterly survey. That’s an idea we can—we can take away and think about. In terms of how low and moderate Americans—you know, they’re clearly—were suffering from, from high inflation. I think during the pandemic, the, the government transfers that happened were very meaningful. And, you know, if you know the—the surveys that we take showed that—showed that low  and moderate income people were actually in very, very strong financial condition. I think now it’s a very “hot” labor market, and you’re seeing high [growth in] nominal wages, and you’re starting to see [that growth rates of] real wages are now positive by most—by most measures. So I, I think, overall, households are in good shape. Surveys are a different thing. So surveys are showing dissatisfaction, and I think a lot of that is just, people hate inflation—hate it. And that, that causes people to say, “The economy’s terrible.” But, at the same time, they’re spending money. Their behavior is, is not exactly what you would expect from the surveys. That’s kind of a, a guess at what the answer might be. But I, I think there’s a lot of good things happening on household balance sheets—and, certainly, in the labor market and with wages. The biggest wage increases having gone to relatively low  wage jobs—and now [with] inflation coming down—you’re seeing [increases in] real wages, which is a good thing. Thanks very much.

****FOMCpresconf20231101

. Good afternoon, everyone. Welcome. My colleagues and I remain squarely focused on our dual mandate to promote maximum employment and stable prices for the American people. We understand the hardship that high inflation is causing, and we remain strongly committed to bringing inflation back down to our 2 percent goal. Price stability is the responsibility of the Federal Reserve. Without price stability, the economy does not work for anyone. In particular, without price stability, we will not achieve a sustained period of strong labor market conditions that benefit all. Since early last year, the FOMC has significantly tightened the stance of monetary policy. We have raised our policy interest rate by 5¼ percentage points and have continued to reduce our securities holdings at a brisk pace. The stance of policy is restrictive—meaning that tight policy is putting downward pressure on economic activity and inflation—and the full effects of our tightening have yet to be felt. Today, we decided to leave our policy interest rate unchanged and to continue to reduce our securities holdings. Given how far we have come, along with the uncertainties and risks we face, the Committee is proceeding carefully. We will make decisions about the extent of additional policy firming and how long policy will remain restrictive based on the totality of the incoming data, the evolving outlook, and the balance of risks. I’ll have more to say about monetary policy after briefly reviewing economic developments. Recent indicators suggest that economic activity has been expanding at a strong pace and well above earlier expectations. In the third quarter, real GDP is estimated to have risen at an outsized annual rate of 4.9 percent, boosted by a surge in consumer spending. After picking up somewhat over the summer, activity in the housing sector has flattened out and remains well below levels of a year ago, largely reflecting higher mortgage rates. Higher interest rates also appear to be weighing on business fixed investment. The labor market remains tight, but supply and demand conditions continue to come into better balance. Over the past three months, payroll job gains averaged 266,000 jobs per month, a strong pace that is nevertheless below that seen earlier in the year. The unemployment rate remains low at 3.8 percent. Strong job creation has been accompanied by an increase in the supply of workers. The labor force participation rate has moved up since late last year, particularly for individuals aged 25 to 54 years, and immigration has rebounded to pre pandemic levels. Nominal wage growth has shown some signs of easing, and job vacancies have declined so far this year. Although the jobs to workers gap has narrowed, labor demand still exceeds the supply of available workers. Inflation remains well above our longer run goal of 2 percent. Total PCE prices rose 3.4 percent over the 12 months ending in September. Excluding the volatile food and energy categories, core PCE prices rose 3.7 percent. Inflation has moderated since the middle of last year, and readings over the summer were quite favorable. But a few months of good data are only the beginning of what it will take to build confidence that inflation is moving down sustainably toward our goal. The process of getting inflation sustainably down to 2 percent has a long way to go. Despite elevated inflation, longer term inflation expectations appear to remain well anchored, as reflected in a broad range of surveys of households, businesses, and forecastters, as well as measures from financial markets. The Fed’s monetary policy actions are guided by our mandate to promote maximum employment and stable prices for the American people. My colleagues and I are acutely aware that high inflation imposes significant hardship as it erodes purchasing power, especially for those least able to meet the higher costs of essentials like food, housing, and transportation. We are highly attentive to the risks that high inflation poses to both sides of our mandate, and we are strongly committed to returning inflation to our 2 percent objective. As I noted earlier, since early last year, we have raised our policy rate by 5¼ percentage points, and we have decreased our securities holdings by more than $1 trillion. Our restrictive stance of monetary policy is putting downward pressure on economic activity and inflation. The Committee decided at today’s meeting to maintain the target range for the federal funds rate at 5¼ to 5½ percent and to continue the process of significantly reducing our securities holdings. We are committed to achieving a stance of monetary policy that is sufficiently restrictive to bring inflation sustainably down to 2 percent over time, and to keeping policy restrictive until we are confident that inflation is on a path to that objective. We are attentive to recent data showing the resilience of economic growth and demand for labor. Evidence of growth persistently above potential, or that tightness in the labor market is no longer easing, could put further progress on inflation at risk and could warrant further tightening of monetary policy. Financial conditions have tightened significantly in recent months, driven by higher longer term bond yields, among other factors. Because persistent changes in financial conditions can have implications for the path of monetary policy, we monitor financial developments closely. In light of the uncertainties and risks, and how far we have come, the Committee is proceeding carefully. We will continue to make our decisions meeting by meeting, based on the totality of the incoming data and their implications for the outlook for economic activity and inflation as well as the balance of risks. In determining the extent of additional policy firming that may be appropriate to return inflation to 2 percent over time, the Committee will take into account the cumulative tightening of monetary policy, the lags with which monetary policy affects economic activity and inflation, and economic and financial developments. We remain committed to bringing inflation back down to our 2 percent goal and to keeping longer term inflation expectations well anchored. Reducing inflation is likely to require a period of below potential growth and some softening of labor market conditions. Restoring price stability is essential to set the stage for achieving maximum employment and stable prices over the longer run. To conclude: We understand that our actions affect communities, families, and businesses across the country. Everything we do is in service to our public mission. We at the Fed will do everything we can to achieve our maximum employment and price stability goals. Thank you, and I look forward to your questions. . Thanks for your question. So, I’ll talk about bond yields, but I want to take a second and just sort of set the broader context in which we’re looking at that. So, if you—if you look at the situation—let’s look at the economy first. Inflation has been coming down, but it’s still running well above our 2 percent target. The labor market has been rebalancing, but it’s still very tight by many measures. GDP growth has been strong, although many forecasters are forecasting, and they have been forecasting, that it will slow. As for the Committee, we are committed to achieving a stance of monetary policy that’s sufficiently restrictive to bring inflation down to 2 percent over time, and we’re not confident yet that we have achieved such a stance. So that is the broader context into which this, this strong economy and all the things I said—that’s the context in which we’re looking at this question of rates. So, obviously we’re monitoring, we’re attentive to the increase in longer term yields and—which have contributed to a tightening of broader financial conditions since the summer. As I mentioned, persistent changes in broader financial conditions can have implications for the path of monetary policy. In this case, the tighter financial conditions we’re seeing—[coming] from higher long term rates, but also from other sources, like the stronger dollar and lower equity prices—could matter for future rate decisions, as long as two conditions are satisfied. The first is that the tighter conditions would need to be persistent. And that is something that remains to be seen. But that’s critical. Things are fluctuating back and forth—that’s not what we’re looking for. With financial conditions, we’re looking for persistent changes that are material. The second thing is that, that the longer term rates that have moved up—they can’t simply be a reflection of, of expected policy moves from us that we would then—that if we didn’t follow through on them, then the rates would come back down. So, and I would say on that, it does not appear that an expectation of higher near term policy rates is causing the increase in longer term rates. So, in the meantime, though, perhaps the most important thing is that these higher Treasury yields are showing through to higher borrowing costs for households and businesses and those higher costs are going to weigh on economic activity to the extent this tightening persists and the mind’s eye goes to the 8 percent—near 8 percent mortgage rate, which could have pretty significant effect on housing. So that’s how I would answer your question. . Yes. That’s exactly right. You know, to say it a different way: We haven’t made any decisions about, about future meetings. We have not made a determination, and we’re not—I will say that we’re not confident at this time that we’ve reached such a stance. We’re not confident that we haven’t  we’re not confident that we have. And that’s—that is—the way we’re going to be going into these future meetings is to be, you know, just determining the extent of any additional further policy tightening that may be appropriate to return inflation to 2 percent over time. . So, let me start by saying we haven’t made a decision about September. You’re asking a hypothetical there. But we’re going into December meeting—we’ll get, as you know, two more inflation ratings, two more labor market readings, some data on, on economic activity, and so we’ll be taking—and also the broader situation, the broader financial condition situation and broader world situation. We’ll be looking at all those things as we make a decision in December. We haven’t made that decision. I would say, though, that, that the idea that if you—the idea that would—difficult to raise again after stopping for a meeting or two, it’s just not right. I mean, the Committee will always do what it thinks is appropriate at the time. And, again, we haven’t made any decisions about— at all about December. We didn’t even—we didn’t talk about making a decision in December today. Really, it was a decision for this meeting and understanding broader things. . So I guess I don’t want to answer your question about the—about the recession. But the answer is “no.” I think I have to answer it, since we did publicly say in the minutes—you’ll know anyway in the [next] minutes—the staff did not put a recession back in. I mean, it would be hard to see how you would do that if you look at the—look at the activity we’ve seen recently, which is not really indicative of a recession in the near term. In terms of how to think about translation into rate hikes, I think it’s just too early to be doing that, and the main reason is we just don’t know how persistent this will be. You can see how volatile it is. Different kinds of news will affect the level of rates, and I think any kind of an estimate that was precise would hang out there and have a great chance of looking wrong very quickly. So I think what we can say is that financial conditions have clearly tightened, and you can see that in the rates that, that consumers and households and businesses are paying now. And over time, that will have an effect. We just don’t know how persistent it’s going to be, and it’s tough to try to translate that in a way that I’d be comfortable communicating into how many rate hikes that is. . Well, I just—that’s, you know, the way our policy works is—and sometimes it works with lags, of course, which can be long and variable, but ultimately, if you raise interest rates, you do see those effects. And you see those effects in the economy now. You see what’s happening in the housing market. You’re seeing that now. You’ll see, if you look at surveys of people, it’s not a good time they think to buy durable goods of various kinds because rates are so high now. I mention again, we’re getting reports from housing that the effects of this—of this could be quite significant. But you’re right. This has been a resilient economy. And it’s, I think, been surprising in its resilience. And there are a number of possible reasons why that may be. Our job is to—is to achieve maximum employment and price stability, and so we take the economy as it comes. It has been resilient, so we just—we take it as it is. . So we’ve identified those factors. Those were not meant to be the only factors or a specific test that we’re going to be applying with some metrics behind it. Really, we’re going to be looking at the broader picture. You know, what’s happening with our progress toward the 2 percent inflation goal? Is the labor market continuing to, broadly, cool off and achieve a better balance? We’ll be looking at that. You know, growth—we look at growth insofar as it has implications for our two mandate goals. We look at that, and we look at broader financial conditions. So we’ll be looking at all of those things as we reach a judgment, you know, whether we need to further tighten policy. And, if we do reach that judgment, then we will further tighten policy. . So it’s, it’s—the fact is the Committee is not thinking about rate cuts right now at all. We’re not talking about rate cuts. We’re still very focused on the first question, which is, have we achieved a stance of monetary policy that’s sufficiently restrictive to bring inflation down to 2 percent over time sustainably? That is the question we’re focusing on. The next question, as you know, will be, for how long will we remain restrictive? Will policy remain restrictive? And what we’ve said there is that we’ll keep policy restrictive until we’re confident that inflation is on a sustainable path down to 2 percent. That’ll be the next question, but honestly, right now we’re really tightly focused on the first question. The question of rate cuts just doesn’t come up because I think the first—it’s so important to get that first question, you know, as close to right as you can. . No. I wouldn’t say that at all. I would say—I mean, the language, looking at it here, “In determining the extent of additional policy firming that may be appropriate to return inflation to 2 percent over time.” That’s the question we’re asking. . We haven’t used that term, but it’s fair to say that’s the question we’re asking is, should we hike more? It’s not—it’s not, you know—that is the question, and you’re right that, in September, we wrote down one additional rate hike. But, you know—and we’ll [each] write down another forecast, as you know, in December. . So, there are significant issues out there, as you point out. Global geopolitical tensions are certainly elevated. And that goes for the war in Ukraine  it goes for the war between Israel and Hamas. We’re monitoring that. Our job is to monitor those things for their economic implications. So, the UAW strike, as you point out is—appears to be coming to an end. Oil prices have flattened out  they haven’t gone down. I guess they’ve gone down a little bit from their earlier peak. Another one is the possibility of government shutdown  we don’t know about that one. So there’s plenty of risk out there. But I would go back to—the bigger picture from our standpoint is, we’ve got a very strong economy, strong labor market, making progress on the labor market, making progress on inflation. And we’re very focused on getting confident that we have achieved a stance of monetary policy that is sufficiently restrictive. That’s really our focus. . I wouldn’t say I was terribly surprised. I was very impressed by York as a town with a real strategy. And I would say it’s very impressive what the people there have put together in the face of, you know, some difficult longer run trends about offshoring of manufacturing and that kind of thing. They’ve done a great job as a city, I think. You know, what you hear—and it’s consistent there—which is people are really suffering under high inflation. You were there. We talked to some people who, you know, were feeling that in their businesses and other people who were feeling it in their home lives as well. You know, it’s painful for people—particularly people who don’t have a lot of extra financial resources who are spending most of their incoming, you know, income on the essentials of life. So we know that. That wasn’t new. But that did come through very clearly in, in the conversations we had in York, and, you know, I walked away from that even—you know, I mean, just thinking that we really—the best thing we can do for the U.S. is to restore price stability—fully restore price stability and not fail in that task and do it as quickly as possible, but also with the least damage we can. . Well, I think everyone has been very gratified to see that we’ve been able to achieve, you know, pretty significant progress on inflation without seeing the kind of increase in unemployment that has been very typical of rate hiking cycles like this one. So that’s, that’s a historically unusual and very welcome result. And the same is true of growth. You know, we’ve been saying that we need to see below potential growth. And growth has been strong, but yet we’re still seeing this. I think I still believe, and my colleagues for the most part I think still believe, that is likely to be true. It is still likely to be true—not a certainty—but likely that we will need to see some slower growth and some softening in the labor market—in labor market conditions to get, you know, to fully restore price stability. So—but it’s only a good thing that we haven’t seen it, and I think we know why. You know, since, since we lifted off, we, we have understood that there are really two processes at work here. One of them—one of which is the unwinding of the distortions to both supply and demand [that arose] from the pandemic and the response to the pandemic. And the other is, is, you know, restrictive monetary policy, which is moderating demand and giving the supply side time to recover—time and space to recover. So you see those two forces now working together to bring down inflation. But it’s that first one can bring down inflation without the need for higher unemployment or slower growth, it’s just—it’s supply—you know, supply side improvements like shortages and bottlenecks and that kind of thing going away. It’s getting, you know, a significant increase in the size of the labor market now, both from labor force participation and from immigration. That’s a big supply side, you know, gain that is really helping the economy, and it’s part of why—part of why GDP is so high is because we’re getting that supply. So, we welcome that. But I think those things will run their course, and we’re probably still going to be left—we think, and I think—we’ll still be left with some ground to cover to get back to full price stability. And that’s where monetary policy and what we do with demand is still going to be important. . You know, I continue to think it’s very hard to say. So it’s been one year at this meeting—one year ago, this was the fourth of our 75 basis points hikes. So that’s a full year since then. I think we are seeing the effects of, of all the hiking we did last year and this year—we’re seeing it. It’s very hard to know exactly what that might be. But you can, for example—an example where you wouldn’t have felt this yet is, is debt that had been termed out. But it’s going to come due and have to get rolled over next year or the year after. So—and there are little things like that where the effects have just taken time to get into the economy. So I don’t—I think we have to make monetary policy under great uncertainty about how long the lags are. I think trying to make a clear—get a clear answer and say, “I’m just going to assume this is really not a good way to do it.” And this is one of the reasons why we have slowed the process down this year, was to give monetary policy time to get into the economy. And it takes time. We know that, and you can’t rush it. So, doing—slowing down is giving us, I think, a better sense of, of how much more we need to do, if we need to do more. . Well so, let’s talk about the dot plot first. So the dot plot is a picture in time of what the people in the Committee think is likely to be appropriate monetary policy in light of their own personal economic forecast. In principle, when things change, it’s not—that’s not, like, planned that anybody’s agreed to or that we will do. That’s a forecast that would change, for example—I mean, many things could change that would cause people to say, “I wouldn’t write down that dot six weeks later.” Think of the number of things that could change your mind on that. So I think the efficacy of the dot plot probably decays over the three month period between that meeting and the next meeting. But, nonetheless, it’s out there. We don’t— we do personally update our forecast, but we don’t formally update the dot plot. So, you know, I think we try to be as transparent as we can about the way we’re thinking about these things. We’re laying out there our thinking, and, you know, as we approach the meeting, we’ll all be— my colleagues and I will be talking about how we’re processing that data. In terms of—so we’re not really changing the way—in terms of growth, what I said was “below potential.” So what you have here recently is growth that is—that is temporarily— potential growth is elevated for a year or two right now over its trend level. So the right way to think about it is, what’s potential growth this year? People think trend growth over a long period of time is a little bit less than 2 percent, or I would say just around 2 percent. But what we’ve had is, with the—with the, you know, improvement in the size of the labor force, as I mentioned, through both participation and immigration, and with the, the, you know, the better functioning in the labor market and with the—with the, you know, the unwinding of the supply chain and shortages and those kinds of things, you’re seeing actually elevated potential growth. There’s catch up growth that can happen in potential. And that means that if you’re growing—you could be growing at 2 percent this year and still be growing below the increase in the potential output of the economy. I hope that’s clear. That’s really what’s going on. That’s why I would say it as below potential. . I mean, I don’t know that I want to just accept anybody’s characterization, but I’ll tell you how we’re doing this. So, we’re going meeting by meeting. We’re asking ourselves whether we’ve achieved a stance of policy that is sufficiently restrictive to bring inflation down to 2 percent over time. That’s the question we’re asking. We’re looking at the full range of economic data, including financial conditions and all of those things that we look at, and then we’re, we’re—you know, we’ve, we’ve come very far with this rate hiking cycle, very far. And you saw the spread at the September meeting of—you know, it’s a relatively small spread of—people think one or two additional hikes. So you’re close to the—to the end of the cycle. That’s—that was an impression as of, I believe, as of September. It’s not a promise or a plan of the future. And so we’re going into these meetings one by one. We’re looking at the data. As I mentioned, we’re also—we’re being careful. We’re proceeding carefully because we can proceed carefully at this time. Monetary policy is restrictive. We see its effects, particularly in interest sensitive spending and other channels. So that’s how I think about it. . So the Committee is not considering changing the pace of balance sheet runoff. It’s not something we’re talking about or considering, and I know there are many candidate explanations for why rates have been going up. And QT is certainly on that list. It may be playing a relatively small effect, although I would say at $3.3 trillion in reserves, it’s not—I think—I think it’s hard to make a case that reserves are even close to scarce at this point. So that’s not something that we’re—that we’re looking at right now. . So, that proposal is out for comment. And we expect a lot of comment. We won’t get those comments until the end of, well, into next year. You know, we’ve extended the deadline. And we’ll take them seriously. We’ll read them. I’ll say what, what I do expect is that we will—we will come to a—we’re a consensus driven organization. We’ll come to a package that has broad support on the Board. . It means broad support. . So what do we look at? We look at a very wide range of financial conditions and, in fact, as you’ll know, different organizations publish different financial conditions’ indexes, which can have, you know, 7 or 8 variables, or they can have 100 variables, so there’s a very rich environment. And we tend to look at a few of them. I’m not going to give you the names, but, you know, they’re a few of the common ones that people look at. And so they’re looking at things like the level of the dollar, the level of equity prices, the level of rates, the credit spreads. Sometimes they’re pulling in credit availability and things like that, so it isn’t any one thing. We would never look at, for example, long term Treasury rates in isolation, nor would we ignore them. But we would look at them as part of a broader picture, and they do play a role, of course, in many of the major standard financial condition indexes. Your second question was? . Banking stress—so it’s something we’re watching. As you know, we, we did have—there were issues with interest rate risk and also funding uninsured deposits in the March—the things we went through in March and thereafter. And so we’ve been working a lot with financial institutions to make sure that they have good funding plans and good—and that they have a plan for how to deal with the kind of portfolio, unrealized, losses that they have. And we do think the banking system is quite resilient. We had, you know, a handful of bank failures but—so that’s, that’s what we’re out there doing. And we don’t have any reason to think that this—that these rate hikes are materially changing that picture, which is one of a strong banking system and one where there’s a strong focus by banks and by supervisors on liquidity, on funding, and those sorts of things. . You know, so you’re right. We put a proposal out for comment, is what we did. And, you know, this is a job that Congress assigned us, as you, of course, know, in Dodd Frank, and all we can really do is faithfully implement the statute. That’s, that’s all we’re trying to do. What else can we really do? It’s a 90 day comment period, and we typically don’t comment on these things once they’re out for—out for comment. And we do hope that stakeholders—and we know that they will use this opportunity to express their views. They haven’t been shy about that. So that’s, that’s critical and that’s, that’s what I can say about that now. . You know, the, the progress is probably going to come in lumps and be bumpy, but we’re making progress. You know, I think the core PCE [inflation rate] came down by almost 60 basis points in the third quarter. So the best thing I could point you to would be the September SEP where, you know, the expectation was that, that inflation by the end of next year, on a 12 month trailing basis, would be well into the 2s and the year after that, further into the 2s. So that’s, that’s—if you look historically, that’s, that’s sort of consistent with the way inflation comes down. It does take some time, and as you get—you know, as you get further and further from those highs, it may actually take longer time. But the good news is, you know, we’re making progress and monetary policy is restrictive. And we feel like we’re on a path to make more progress, and it’s essential that we do. . That’s always the question we’re asking ourselves. And we know that, if we fail to restore price stability, the risk is that expectations of higher inflation get entrenched in the economy, and we know that that’s really bad for people. Inflation will be both more—both higher and more volatile. That’s a—that’s a prescription for misery, and, and so we’re really committed to not letting that happen. You know, for the first year or so of our tightening cycle, the risk was all on the side of not doing enough. We’re, you know, we’re— we’ve come far enough that, that the risks, you know, have gotten more two sided. You can’t identify that with a lot of precision, but it does feel like the, the risks are more two sided now. And—but we’re committed to getting inflation back down to our target over time, and we will. . Good question. We haven’t really—we haven’t really been thinking about that yet. We—you know, it’s November 1, and that’s a decision we’ll be making in the first quarter of next year. . Yeah. We look at a range of, of things. I think the, the, the, you know, the UM thing got blown out of proportion a little bit. It was actually a preliminary estimate that got revised away. And I said it was preliminary in it, but that didn’t get picked up. So we look at many, many things. So really, look across the broad array of surveys and also market based estimates, and, you know, we do that really carefully at every meeting and between meetings. And, you know, there’s—it’s just clear that inflation expectations are in a good place. The public does believe that inflation will get back down to 2 percent over time,. And it will— they’re right. So—and there’s no real crack in that—in that armor. You can always find one reading that is a little bit out of whack, but, honestly, the bulk of them are just very clear that the public believes that inflation will come down. And that’s, of course—we believe that’s critical in winning the battle. . Yeah. So first thing to say is that it’s very important. It’s a very important variable in, in the way we think about monetary policy, but you can’t identify it with any precision in real time. And we know that. So you have to just take that—you have to take your estimate of it with a grain of salt. What we know now is, you know, within a range of estimates of the neutral rate policy, is restrictive, and it’s therefore putting downward pressure on economic activity, hiring, and inflation. So we do—we do talk about this. There’s not any debate or attempt to, you know, to sort of agree as a group on what—whether r* has moved or not. Some people think it has, some people haven’t said—that don’t think it has. Ultimately, it’s unknowable, and so really again, what we’re focused on is, you know, looking at the data and giving ourselves a little more time now to look carefully at the data by being careful in our moves. Does it—does it feel like monetary policy is restrictive enough to bring inflation down to 2 percent over time? That’s the question we’re asking ourselves. I think, you know, years from now economists will be revising their estimates of r* as it existed on November 1, 2023. You can’t—we can’t really wait for that in making policy. We have to look—we have to have those models and look at them and think about them, and, ultimately, we’ve got to look at the effects that policy is having, accounting for the lags, which makes it difficult. . So, if you look at the—look at the broad range of wages, they have— wage increases have really come down significantly over the course of the last 18 months to a level where they’re substantially closer to that level that would be consistent with 2 percent inflation over time, making standard assumptions about productivity over time. So it’s much closer than it was. And that’s true of the ECI, which is the one that’s—the one that we got this week. It’s true of average hourly earnings and compensation per hour, too. So—and all of them are kind of saying that, which is great. And you have to look at a group of them because any one of them can be idiosyncratic from—in any given reading. So that’s what you see. And so what you saw with the ECI reading was, if you look back a couple—it comes out four times a year—if you look back a couple of quarters, you’ll see it was much higher, then it came down substantially in June. And then the September reading was more or less at the same level as the June reading. So, in a way, it’s just validating that decline, and it was very close to our expectations internally, too. So I think we feel good about that. Also I would say it isn’t—in my thinking, it’s not the case that, that wages have been the principal driver of inflation so far, although I think it’s all—I do think it’s fair to say that, as we go forward, as monetary policy becomes more important relative to the supply side issues I’ve talked about in the unwinding of the pandemic effects, it may be that the labor market becomes more important over time, too. . So, as I mentioned, I think for much of the last year and a half, the concern was not doing too, too—not doing enough. It was not getting rates high enough in time to avoid having inflation expectations—higher inflation expectations become entrenched. So that was the concern. I think we’ve reached, you know, now more than 18 months into this. You can see by the fact that we have slowed down, although we’re still—we’re still—we’re still trying to gain confidence in what the appropriate stance is. But you can see that. We think, and I think, that the risks are getting more balanced. I’ll just say that they’re getting more balanced. The risk of doing too much versus the risk of doing too little are getting—are getting more— closer to balance, because policy is I think clearly restrictive at 5¼ to 5½ percent. That range, if you take off a mainstream estimate of the expected inflation, take one year inflation, you’re going to see that. You’re going to see a real policy rate that is well above mainstream estimates of a neutral policy rate. Now that’s arithmetic. It doesn’t really—the proof is really in how the economy reacts, but I would say that we’re in a place where those risks are getting closer to being in balance. . Well, I think what we’re looking at is are we still—is inflation still broadly cooling? Do we—is it sort of validating the path we saw over the summer, where inflation was clearly cooling and coming down. Now we’ve seen periods like that before, and they’ve just—there hasn’t been follow through. The data have bounced back. So what are we seeing? Are we seeing—is inflation still coming down? So that’s the first thing. The second thing is, in the labor market, what we’ve seen is a very positive rebalancing of supply and demand, partly through just much more supply coming online. And with labor demand still clearly remaining very strong—when you have the kind of job growth we’ve had over the last quarter, it’s still very strong demand. So—and you see wage increases coming down as we discussed but coming down in a kind of gradual way. I think that’s—we want to see that, that whole set of processes continue. . I wouldn’t say there’s been a structural change in consumption. I would say it’s certainly been strong. And so a couple of things. We may have underestimated the balance sheet strength of households and small businesses, and that may be part of it. There may be—you know, we’ve been, like everyone else, trying to estimate the number—the amount of savings that households have from the pandemic when they couldn’t spend on services really at all, or in person services. And, you know, there can still be more of that than we think, although at a certain point we have to—we’re going to be getting back to pre pandemic levels of savings. We may not be there yet. So things are—clearly, people are still spending. The dynamic has been really strong job creation with now wages that are—that are higher than inflation, in the aggregate anyway, and that raises real disposable income, and that raises spending, which continues to drive more hiring. And so you’ve had a really—that whole—that whole dynamic has been, and also at the same time, the pandemic effects are wearing off, so that goods availability, automobile availability is better—or was better, I think it still is. And, from a business standpoint, there are more people to hire. And it is more labor supply. So the whole thing has led to more growth, more spending, and that kind of thing. And it’s been—you know, it’s been good, and the thing is, we’ve been achieving progress on inflation in the middle of this. So, it’s been a dynamic. The question is, how long can that continue? And, you know, I just think this—the existence of this second set of factors at this time, which is the unwinding of the pandemic effects, that’s what makes this cycle unique, I think, and, you know, we’re still learning. That took longer for that process to begin than we thought, and we’re still learning about how it plays out. That’s all we can do. . I wouldn’t want to speculate too much, but I’ll just say so—you know, really the question there is, does the war spread more widely and does it start to do things like affect oil prices in particular, since this is the Middle East we’re talking about. The price of oil has really not reacted very much so far to this. As the—you know, as the Fed—as the Federal Open Market Committee, our job is really to talk about [and] to understand the economy and economic effects. And it isn’t clear, at this point, that the conflict in the Middle East is going to—is on track to have significant economic effects. That doesn’t mean it isn’t incredibly important and something for people to, you know, to take really important notice of, but it may or may not turn out to be something that matters for the Federal Open Market Committee as an economic body. But—so what the Financial Stability Report does is it “calls out” risks. And that’s what it’s doing—[it] is calling out a risk of that. And the war in Ukraine, the same. The war in Ukraine did have, immediately, very significant macroeconomic implications because of the connection to commodities. So, thank you. Thanks very much.

****FOMCpresconf20231213

. Good afternoon. My colleagues and I remain squarely focused on our dual mandate to promote maximum employment and stable prices for the American people. As we approach the end of the year, it’s natural to look back on the progress that has been made toward our dual mandate objectives. Inflation has eased from its highs, and this has come without a significant increase in unemployment. That’s very good news. But inflation is still too high, ongoing progress in bringing it down is not assured, and the path forward is uncertain. As we look ahead to next year, I want to assure the American people that we’re fully committed to returning inflation to our 2 percent goal. Restoring price stability is essential to achieve a sustained period of strong labor market conditions that benefit all. Since early last year, the FOMC has significantly tightened the stance of monetary policy. We’ve raised our policy interest rate by 5¼ percentage points and have continued to reduce our securities holdings at a brisk pace. Our actions have moved our policy rate well into restrictive territory, meaning that tight policy is putting downward pressure on economic activity and inflation, and the full effects of our tightening likely have not yet been felt. Today, we decided to leave our policy interest rate unchanged and to continue to reduce our securities holdings. Given how far we have come, along with the uncertainties and risks that we face, the Committee is proceeding carefully. We will make decisions about the extent of any additional policy firming and how long policy will remain restrictive based on the totality of the incoming data, the evolving outlook, and the balance of risks. I will have more to say about monetary policy after briefly reviewing economic developments. Recent indicators suggest that growth of economic activity has slowed substantially from the outsized pace seen in the third quarter. Even so, GDP is on track to expand around 2½ percent for the year as a whole, bolstered by strong consumer demand as well as improving supply conditions. After picking somewhat over the—up somewhat over the summer, activity in the housing sector has flattened out and remains well below the levels of a year ago, largely reflecting higher mortgage rates. Higher interest rates also appear to be weighing on business fixed investment. In our Summary of Economic Projections (SEP), Committee participants revised up their assessments of GDP growth this year but expect growth to cool, with the median projection falling to 1.4 percent next year. The labor market remains tight, but supply and demand conditions continue to come into better balance. Over the past three months, payroll job gains averaged 204,000 jobs per month, a strong pace that is nevertheless below that seen earlier in the year. The unemployment rate remains low at 3.7 percent. Strong job creation has been accompanied by an increase in the supply of workers. The labor force participation rate has moved up since last year, particularly for individuals aged 25 to 54 years, and immigration has returned to pre pandemic levels. Nominal wage growth appears to be easing, and job vacancies have declined. Although the jobs to workers gap has narrowed, labor demand still exceeds the supply of available workers. FOMC participants expect the rebalancing in the labor market to continue, easing upward pressures on inflation. The median unemployment rate projection in the SEP rises somewhat from 3.8 percent at the end of this year to 4.1 percent at the end of next year. Inflation has eased over the past year but remains above our longer run goal of 2 percent. Based on the consumer price index and other data, we estimate that total PCE prices rose 2.6 percent over the 12 months ending in November and that, excluding the volatile food and energy categories, core PCE prices rose 3.1 percent. The lower inflation readings over the past several months are welcome, but we will need to see further evidence to build confidence that inflation is moving down sustainably toward our goal. Longer term inflation expectations appear to remain well anchored, as reflected in a broad range of surveys of households, businesses, and forecasters, as well as measures from financial markets. As is evident from the SEP, we anticipate that the process of getting inflation all the way to 2 percent will take some time. The median projection in the SEP is 2.8 percent this year, falls to 2.4 percent next year, and reaches 2 percent in 2026. The Fed’s monetary policy actions are guided by our mandate to promote maximum employment and stable prices for the American people. My colleagues and I are acutely aware that high inflation imposes significant hardship, as it erodes purchasing power, especially for those least able to meet the higher costs of essentials like food, housing, and transportation. We are highly, highly attentive to the risks that high inflation poses to both sides of our mandate, and we are strongly committed to returning inflation to our 2 percent objective. As I noted earlier, since early last year, we have raised our policy rate by 5¼ percentage points, and we have decreased our securities holdings by more than $1 trillion. Our restrictive stance of monetary policy is putting downward pressure on economic activity and inflation. The Committee decided at today’s meeting to maintain the target range for the federal funds rate at 5¼ to 5½ percent and to continue the process of significantly reducing our securities holdings. While we believe that our policy rate is likely at or near its peak for this tightening cycle, the economy has surprised forecasters in many ways since the pandemic, and ongoing progress—sorry—ongoing progress toward our 2 percent inflation objective is not assured. We are prepared to tighten policy further if appropriate. We’re committed to achieving a stance of monetary policy that is sufficiently restrictive to bring inflation sustainably down to 2 percent over time and to keeping policy restrictive until we’re confident that inflation is on a path to that objective. In our SEP, FOMC participants wrote down their individual assessments of an appropriate path for the federal funds rate based on what each participant judges to be the most likely scenario going forward. While participants do not view it as likely to be appropriate to raise interest rates further, neither do they want to take the possibility off the table. If the economy evolves as projected, the median participant projects that the appropriate level of the federal funds rate will be 4.6 percent at the end of 2024, 3.6 percent at the end of 2025, and 2.9 percent at the end of 2026, still above the median longer term rate. These projections are not a Committee decision or plan  if the economy does not evolve as projected, the path of policy will adjust as appropriate to foster our maximum employment and price stability goals. In light of the uncertainties and risks, and how far we have come, the Committee is proceeding carefully. We will continue to make our decisions meeting by meeting, based on the totality of the incoming data and their implications for the outlook for economic activity and inflation, as well as the balance of risks. In determining the extent of any additional policy firming that may be appropriate to return inflation to 2 percent over time, the Committee will take into account the cumulative tightening of monetary policy, the lags with which monetary policy affects economic activity and inflation, and economic and financial developments. We remain committed to bringing inflation back down to our 2 percent goal and to keeping longer  term inflation expectations well anchored. Restoring price stability is essential to set the stage for achieving maximum employment and stable prices over the longer run. To conclude: We understand that our actions affect communities, families, and businesses across the country. Everything we do is in service to our public mission. We at the Fed will do everything we can to achieve our maximum employment and price stability goals. Thank you. I look forward to your questions. . So—specifically on “any”: We do say that “in determining the extent of any additional policy firming that may be appropriate,” so “any additional policy firming”—that sentence. So we added the word “any” as an acknowledgement that we believe that we are likely at or near the, the peak rate for this cycle. Participants didn’t write down additional hikes that we believe are likely, so that’s what we wrote down. But participants also didn’t want to take the possibility of further hikes off the table. So that’s really what we were thinking. . So, of course, I don’t comment on, on any other officials, even those who work at the Fed. But I’ll—but I’ll try to answer your question more broadly. So the way— the way we’re looking at it is, is really this. When we started out, right, we said the first question is, how fast to move, and we moved very fast. The second question is, you know, really, how high to raise the policy rate? And that’s really the question that we’re still on here. We’re, we’re very focused on that, as I—as I mentioned. People generally think that we’re at or near that and, and think it’s not likely that we will hike, although they don’t take that possibility off the table. So that’s—when you get to that question, and that’s your answer, there’s a natural—naturally, it begins to be the next question, which is when it will become appropriate to begin dialing back the amount of policy restraint that’s in place. So that’s really the next question, and that’s what people are thinking about and, and talking about. And I would just say this. We are seeing, you know, strong growth that is—that appears to be moderating  we’re seeing a labor market that is coming back into balance by so many measures  and we’re seeing inflation making real progress. These are the things we’ve been wanting to see. We can’t know. We still have a ways to go. No one is declaring victory. That would be premature. And we can’t be guaranteed of this progress [continuing]. So we’re, we’re moving carefully in making that assessment of whether we need to do more or not. And that’s, that’s really the question that we’re on. But, of course, the other question, the question of when will it become appropriate to begin dialing back the amount of policy restraint in place, that, that begins to come into view and is clearly a discussion—topic of discussion out in the world and also a discussion for us at our meeting today. . Sure. So it, it comes up in this way today. Everybody wrote down an SEP forecast. So many people mentioned what their—what their rate forecast was. And there was no back and forth, no attempt to sort of reach agreement like, “This is what I wrote down  this is what I think,” that kind of thing, and a preliminary kind of a discussion like that. Not everybody did that, but many people did. And then, and I would say, there’s a general expectation that this will be—this will be a topic for us, looking ahead. That, that’s really what happened in today’s meeting. I can’t do the head count for you in real time. But that’s generally what happened today. . I think you can say that there’s little basis for thinking that the economy is in a recession now. I would say that. I think there’s, there’s always a probability that, that there will be a recession in the next year, and it’s a meaningful probability no matter what the economy is doing. So it’s always a real possibility. The question is, is it—so it’s a possibility here. I have always felt, since the beginning, that there was a possibility, because of the unusual situation, that the economy could cool off in a way that enabled inflation to come down without the kind of large job losses that have often been associated with high inflation and tightening cycles. So far, that’s what we’re seeing. That’s what many forecasters, on and off the Committee, are seeing. This result is not guaranteed. It is—it is far too early to declare victory. And there are certainly risks. It’s certainly possible that, that the economy will behave in an unexpected way. It has done that repeatedly through the post—in the post pandemic period. Nonetheless, where we are is, is we see the things that I—that I mentioned. . So I think forecasters generally, if you go back a year, were very broadly forecasting a recession for this year, for 2023. And not only did that not happen—that includes Fed forecasters and really, essentially, all forecasters  a very high proportion of forecasters predicted very weak growth or a recession—not only did that not happen, we actually had a very strong year, and that was a combination of, of strong demand but also of real gains on the supply side. So this was the year when labor force participation picked up, where immigration picked up, where the distortions to supply and demand from the pandemic—you know, the shortages and the bottlenecks—really began to unwind. So we had significant supply side gains with strong demand, and we got what looks like a 2½ percent plus, or a little more than that, growth year at a time when potential growth this year might even have been higher than that, just because of the healing on the supply side. So that was a surprise to just about everybody. I think the inflation forecast is roughly, roughly what people wrote down a year ago, but in a very different setting. And I would say the labor market, because of the stronger growth, has also been significantly better. If you look back at the SEP from a year ago, there was a significant increase in, in unemployment. It didn’t really happen. We’re still at 3.7 percent. So we’ve seen, you know, strong growth, still a tight labor market but one that’s coming back into balance with the—with support from the supply side, a greater supply of labor. It’s a—you know, that’s, that’s what we see, and I think that combination was, was not anticipated broadly. . Nothing quite that mechanical is happening. The SEP really is, is a bottoms up—built from the bottom up, right? So I think people are looking at what’s happening in the economy. And I think if you look at the big difference from September in the SEP, [it is that] the expectations for inflation this year, both headline and core, have come down, you know, really significantly in three months. That’s a big piece of, of this. At the same time, [real GDP] growth has turned out to be very strong in the third quarter. [Now it] is slowing, we believe, as, as appropriate. And we’ve got—we’ve had several labor market reports, which suggest, again, significant progress toward greater balance across a very—a broad range of indicators. You’re seeing so many of the indicators coming back to normal, not all of them. But so I think that people look at that, and they write down their—basically, each individual writes down a forecast and a rate forecast that goes with that forecast. We tabulate them and, and publish it. And so it’s not—it isn’t—you ask about real rates, I take it? . You know, that’s—that is—that is something that we’re very conscious of, and aware of, and monitor, and it’s certainly a big part of—it’s a part of how we think about things. But, really, it’s broader financial conditions that matter. And, as you well know, it’s so hard to know exactly, you know, what the—what the real rate is or exactly how tight policy is at any given time. So you couldn’t follow that like it was a rule and think that you would get the right answer all the time, but it’s certainly something that we’re focused on. And, indeed, if you look at the projections, I think the expectation would be that the real rate is declining as we—as we move forward. . Yeah. No, we—we’re—we don’t think about political events. We don’t think about politics. We think about what’s the right thing to do for the economy. The minute we start thinking about those things—you know, we just can’t do that. We have to think, what’s the right thing? We’ll do the things that we think are right for the economy at the time we—when we think is the right time. That’s what we’ll always do. So I mentioned we’re moving carefully. One of the things we’re moving carefully about is that decision over—that assessment, really—over whether, whether we’ve done enough, really. And you see that people are not writing down rate hikes. That’s, that’s us thinking that we have done enough but not, not feeling that really strongly, confidently and not wanting to take the possibility of a rate hike off the table. Nonetheless, it’s not the base case anymore, obviously, as it was, you know, 60, 90 days ago. So that’s, that’s how we’re—that’s how we’re approaching things. And, and, you know, as I mentioned, we wrote down this SEP, and it talks about—people have individual assessments of when it will be appropriate to, you know, to start to dial back on, on the tight policy we have in place, and that’s a discussion we’ll be having going forward. But that’s another assessment that we’re going to make very carefully, so as time goes forward. . So this last year has been remarkable for the, the sort of seesaw thing, the back and forth we’ve had over the course of the year of markets moving away and moving back and that kind of thing. So, and what I would just say is that we, we focus on what we have to do and how we need to use our tools to achieve our goals, and that’s what we really focus on. And people are going to have different forecasts about the economy, and they’re going to—those are going to show up in market conditions, or they won’t, you know. But in any case, we have to do what we think is right. And, you know, in the long run, it’s important that financial conditions become aligned or are aligned with what we’re trying to accomplish, and, in the long run, they will be, of course, because we will do what it takes to get to our goals. And, ultimately, that will mean that financial conditions will, will come along. But in the meantime, there can be back and forth, and, you know, I’m just focused on what’s the right thing for us to do. And my colleagues are focused on that, too. . Listen, I welcome the progress. I think it’s, it’s really good to see the progress that we’re making. I think if you look at the 12 month—look at the 6 month measures, you see very low numbers. If you look at 12 month measures, you’re still well above 2 percent. You’re actually above 3 percent on core, through November, PCE [inflation]. That isn’t to say— I’m not, you know, calling into question the progress. It’s great. We just need to see more. We need to see, you know, continued further, further progress toward getting back to 2 percent. That’s, that’s what we need to see. So, you know, our—it’s our job to restore price stability. And that—it’s one of our two jobs, along with maximum employment, and they’re equal. So we’re very focused on, on, you know, doing that. As I mentioned, we’re moving carefully at this point. We’re pleased with the progress, but, but we see the need for further progress, and I think—I think it’s fair to say there is a lot of uncertainty about going forward. We’ve seen the economy move in surprising directions, so we’re just going to need to see more further progress. . So we’ll, we’ll look at the totality of the data. Growth is one thing, so is inflation, so is labor market data. So we’d, we’d look at the totality. As we—as we make decisions about policy changes going forward, we’re going to be looking at all those things and, particularly, about the—as they affect the outlook. So it’s ultimately all about the outlook and the balance of risks as well. So that’s what—that’s what we’d be looking for. If we have stronger growth, you know, that’ll be good for people. That’ll be good for the labor market. It might actually mean that it takes a little longer to get inflation down to 2 percent. We will get it down to 2 percent, but, you know, if we see stronger growth, we’ll—we will set policy according to what we actually see. And, and so that’s how I would answer. . It’s only a problem inso—it’s not itself a problem. It’s only a problem insofar as it makes it more difficult for us to achieve our goals. And, you know, if you have—if you have growth that’s robust, what that will mean is probably it will keep the labor market very strong. It probably will, will place some upward pressure on inflation. That could mean that it takes longer to get to 2 percent inflation. That could mean we need to keep rates higher for longer. It could even mean, ultimately, that we would need to hike again. It just is— it’s the way, the way our policy works. . So on, on the better balance side, there are just a lot of things. It’s— you see—you see job growth still strong but moving back down to more sustainable levels, given population growth and labor force participation. The things that are not quite—but let me go on with that list. You know, claims are low. If you look at surveys of businesses, they’re, they’re— sort of the era of this frantic labor shortage, [those kinds of worker shortages] are behind us, and they’re seeing a shortage of labor as being significantly alleviated. If you look at shortages of workers, whereas they thought job, job availability was the highest that it’d ever been or close to it, that’s now down to more normal levels by so many measures—participation, unemployment—so many measures: the unemployment—job openings, quits, all of those things. So wages are still running a bit above what would be consistent with 2 percent inflation over a long period of time. They’ve been gradually cooling off. But if wages are running around 4 percent, that’s still a bit above, I would say. And I guess there, there are just a couple of other—the unemployment rate is very, very low. And these are—but, but I would just say, overall, the development of the labor market has been very positive. It’s been a good time for workers to find jobs and get solid wage increases. . It may be. A common theme is that, while inflation is coming down, and that’s very good news, the price level is not coming down. Prices of some, some goods and services are coming down. But overall, in the aggregate, the price level is not. So people are still living with high prices, and that’s, that’s not—that is something that people don’t like. And, you know, so what will happen with that is, wages are now—[changes in] real wages are now positive. So [nominal] wages are now moving up more than inflation, as inflation comes down. And so that might help improve the mood of people. But we do see those—we see those public opinion surveys. The thing that we can do is to do our jobs, which is to use our tools to foster price stability, which has such great benefits over such long periods of time, and which is the thing that really enables us to work for and achieve an extended period of high employment, which is so beneficial for, you know, families and, and companies around the country. . Sorry—if? . That’s not something we’re hoping to see. Obviously, we’re hoping to, to see something very different—which is a continuation of what we have seen, which is the labor market coming into better balance without a significant increase in unemployment, inflation coming down without a significant increase in unemployment, and growth moderating without a significant increase in unemployment. That’s what we’re, we’re trying very much to achieve and not something that we’re looking to see. . You know, obviously, what we’ll do is we’ll look at the totality of the data, as I’ve mentioned a couple times, and, certainly, the labor data would be important in that. And, you know, if you—if you can describe a situation like that where if, if there were the beginning of a recession or something like that, then, yes, that would certainly weigh heavily on that decision. . So we’re, we’re aware of the risk that we would hang on too long. You know, we know that that’s a risk, and we’re very focused on not making that mistake. And we do regard the two—you know, we’ve come back into a better balance between the risk of overdoing it and the risk of underdoing it. Not only that, we were able to focus hard on the—on the price stability mandate. And we’re getting back to the point where—which is what you do when you’re very far from, from one of them, one of the two mandates—you’re getting now back to the point where both mandates are important, and they’re, they’re more in balance, too. So I think we’ll be—we’ll be very much keeping that in mind, as we make policy going forward. And the things we’ll be looking at, I’ve already described. You know, we’re, we’re obviously looking hard at what’s happening with demand, and what we see? We see the same thing other people see, which is a strong economy, which really put up quite a performance in 2023. We see good evidence and good reason to believe that growth will come in lower next year. And you see what the forecasts are. I think the median growth—median participant wrote down 1.4 percent growth, but, you know, we’ll have to see. It’s very hard to predict. We’ll also be looking to see progress on inflation and, you know, the labor market remaining strong but, but ideally, without seeing the kind of large increase in unemployment that happens sometimes. . We haven’t typically tried to articulate, with one exception, really specific target levels, which was if you—some of you will remember the thresholds that we used in, I guess, 2013. I don’t—the answer is, these are things that we haven’t, you know, really worked out yet. We’re sort of just at the beginning of, of that discussion. . It wouldn’t, if that were to—first of all, let me just say, that isn’t a plan. That’s, that’s just cumulating what people wrote down. So that’s not something—you know this, but allow me to say it again: We don’t debate or discuss what the right, you know, whose SEP is right. We just say what they are, and we tabulate them and publish them. So and it’s, you know, it’s important for people to know that. But it wouldn’t need to be a sign of—it could just be a sign that the economy is normalizing, and it doesn’t need the tight policy. It depends on—the economy can evolve in many different ways, right? So but, but it could be more of what I just described. . Well, that’s what we’re finding out, and we’ve, you know, we’ve seen real progress in, in core inflation. It has been sticky, and famously, the service sector is thought to be stickier, but we’ve actually seen reasonable progress in nonhousing services, which was the area where, where you would expect to see less progress. We are seeing some progress there, though. And, in fact, all three of the categories of core [prices] are now contributing: goods, housing services, nonhousing services. They’re all contributing in different—at different levels, you know, meeting by meeting—or, rather, report by report. So, yeah. . Right. So we got—we got CPI the morning of the first day, and we got PPI the next day, which informs the, you know, the translation into PCE [inflation]. So it’s very late in the game, you know, to—but nonetheless, participants are allowed to, encouraged to update their SEP forecast until probably midmorning today. After that, so staff has to—has to cumulate all of that and create the documents that you see. So until about midmorning, a little, maybe late morning, it’s okay to update, and I believe some people did update their forecast based on what we saw today. . The question of whether there have been fundamental structural shifts is, is really hard to know the answer and a very interesting one right now. The one that would affect—the one that comes to mind, though, is just the question of where the neutral rate of interest is. And so, for example, if it’s risen, and I’m not saying that it has, but if it were to have risen, that would mean that, that interest rates would need to be a little bit higher to convey the same level of restriction. The thing is, we’re not really going to know that. You know, people will be writing papers about that 10 years from now and still fighting about it. So it’s just that it’s going to be uncertain. So we’re going to be making policy in this, you know, difficult, uncertain, really unprecedented environment. Some—someone once said that you know the—you know the natural rate of interest by its works, and that’s really right, but that’s very difficult because policy operates with a lag. So that’s one of the reasons why we slowed down this year. We started slowing down at this meeting last year, reducing the pace at which we were adding restriction. And, over the course of this year, we really slowed down a lot to give those lags time to work. In terms of demand, has demand shifted more away from services into goods? There’s— you can make a case for that, that the shift back into services has not been complete, and it doesn’t look like it’s ongoing, but I don’t know if that’s right. Maybe people just bought so much stuff that they temporarily don’t want any more stuff. They haven’t got anyplace to put it. [Laughter] . I mean, the reason you wouldn’t wait to get to 2 percent to cut rates is that policy would be, it would be too late. I mean, you’d want to be reducing restriction on the economy well before 2 percent because—or before you get to 2 percent so you don’t overshoot, if we think, think of restrictive policy as weighing on economic activity. You know, it takes—it takes a while for policy to get into the economy, affect economic activity, and affect inflation. So I can’t give you a precise answer. But if you look at what’s in the—in the SEP, and, you know, I think you’ll see a reasonable estimate of the time lags and things like that that it would take. . I wouldn’t want to—I wouldn’t want to identify any one precise point, because I would be able to look back then and probably find out that it turned out not to be right. But we’ll be looking at it and, and looking at the broad collection of factors. . I think—I think this. You know, we felt since the beginning that it would be a combination of two factors. The first factor is just the unwinding of, of what happened in the pandemic: the distortions of supply and demand. And the second thing would be our policy, which was weighing on aggregate demand and actually making it easier for the supply side to recover because of lower demand. We thought those two things were going to be necessary. Sorry, say your—say the last part of your question again. . Yeah. So it’s not that—it may or may not be about “different,” the U.S. economy being different. I think that this inflation was not the classic demand overload, pot boiling over, kind of inflation that we [typically] think about. It was a combination of very strong demand, without question, and unusual supply side restrictions, both on the goods side but also on the labor side, because we had a—we had a participation shock. So this is just very unusual. And, you know, we had the view—my colleagues and I broadly had the view—that we could get a lot of—you know, you had essentially a vertical supply curve, because you ran into the limits of, of capacity at very low levels, because there weren’t workers and because people couldn’t—the supply chains were all broken. So we, we had the view that you could come straight down that vertical supply curve to the extent demand [was] lowered, reduced. And, you know, something like that has happened. It happened so far. The question is, you know, once, once that part of it runs out—and we think it has a ways to run  we definitely think that the sort of supply chain and shortages side has some, some ways to run—does labor force participation have much more to run? It might. Immigration could help, but it may be that, at some point—at some point, you will run out of supply side help, and then it gets down to demand, and it gets harder. That’s, that’s very possible. But to say with certainty that the last mile is going to be different, I’d be reluctant to, you know, to suggest that we have any certainty around that. We just don’t know. I mean, inflation keeps coming down. The labor market keeps getting back into balance. And it’s so far, so good—although we kind of assume that it will get harder from here. But so far, it hasn’t. . We’re, we’re not talking about altering the pace of QT right now, just to get that out of the way. So the balance sheet seems to be working pretty much as expected. What we’ve been seeing is, you know, that we’re allowing runoff each month. That’s adding up. I think we’re down—we’re close to 1.2 trillion [dollars]. That’s showing up. The reverse repo facility [take  up] has been coming down quickly, and reserves have been either moving up or—as a result—or holding steady. At a certain point, you know, there won’t be any more to come out of, or there’ll be a level where [take up at] the reverse repo facility levels out. And, at that point, reserves will start to come down. You know, we still have—you know that we intend to reduce our securities holdings until we judge that the quantity of reserve balances has reached a level somewhat above that consistent with ample reserves, and we also intend to slow and then stop the decline in size of the balance sheet when reserve balances are somewhat above the level judged to be consistent with ample reserves. We’re not at those levels, you know, with, with reserves close to 3.5 trillion [dollars]. We’re not—we don’t think we’re at those [levels judged consistent with ample] reserves. There isn’t a lot of evidence of that. We’re watching it carefully. And, you know, so far—so far, it’s working pretty much as expected, we think. . So I think they’re, they’re on independent tracks. You’re asking, though, the question, I guess you’re implying the question of can you continue with QT at such time—QT, which is a tightening action—at such time as policy is still tight? And the answer is, it depends on the reason. You know, if you’re—if you’re—if you’re cutting rates because you’re going back to normal, that’s one thing, [and distinct from] if you’re cutting them because the economy is really weak. So you can imagine, you’d have to know what the reason is to know whether it would be appropriate to do those two things at the same time. . Thanks very much.

****FOMCpresconf20240131

. Good afternoon. My colleagues and I remain squarely focused on our dual mandate to promote maximum employment and stable prices for the American people. The economy has made good progress toward our dual mandate objectives. Inflation has eased from its highs without a significant increase in unemployment. That’s very good news. But inflation is still too high, ongoing progress in bringing it down is not assured, and the path forward is uncertain. I want to assure the American people that we’re fully committed to returning inflation to our 2 percent goal. Restoring price stability is essential to achieve a sustained period of strong labor market conditions that benefit all. Today, the FOMC decided to leave our policy interest rate unchanged and to continue to reduce our securities holdings. Over the past two years, we’ve significantly tightened the stance of monetary policy. Our strong actions have moved our policy rate well into restrictive territory, and we’ve been seeing the effects on economic activity and inflation. As labor market tightness has eased and progress on inflation has continued, the risks to achieving our employment and inflation goals are moving into better balance. I will have more to say about monetary policy— about monetary policy, after briefly reviewing economic developments. Recent indicators suggest that economic activity has been expanding at a solid pace. GDP growth in the fourth quarter of last year came in at 3.3 percent. For 2023 as a whole, GDP expanded at 3.1 percent, bolstered by strong consumer demand as well as improving supply conditions. Activity in the housing sector was subdued over the past year, largely reflecting high mortgage rates. High interest rates also appear to have been weighing on business fixed investment. The labor market remains tight, but supply and demand conditions continue to come into better balance. Over the past three months, payroll job gains averaged 165,000 jobs per month, a pace that is well below that seen a year ago but still strong. The unemployment rate remains low at 3.7 percent. Strong job creation has been accompanied by an increase in the supply of workers. The labor force participation rate has moved up, on balance, over the past year, particularly for individuals aged 25 to 54 years, and immigration has returned to pre pandemic levels. Nominal wage growth has been easing, and job vacancies have declined. Although the jobs to workers gap has narrowed, labor demand still exceeds the supply of available workers. Inflation has eased notably over the past year but remains above our longer run goal of 2 percent. Total PCE prices rose 2.6 percent over the 12 months ending in December  excluding the volatile food and energy categories, core PCE prices rose 2.9 percent. The lower inflation readings over the second half of last year are welcome. But we will need to see continuing evidence to build confidence that inflation is moving down sustainably toward our goal. Longer  term inflation expectations appear to remain well anchored, as reflected in a broad range of surveys of households, businesses, and forecasters, as well as measures from financial markets. The Fed’s monetary policy actions are guided by our mandate to promote maximum employment and stable prices for the American people. My colleagues and I are acutely aware that high inflation imposes significant hardship, as it erodes purchasing power, especially for those least able to meet the higher costs of essentials like food, housing, and transportation. We’re highly attentive to the risks that high inflation poses to both sides of our mandate, and we’re strongly committed to returning inflation to our 2 percent objective. Over the past two years, we have raised our policy rate by 5¼ percentage points, and we’ve decreased our securities holdings by more than $1.3 trillion. Our restrictive stance of monetary policy is putting downward pressure on economic activity and inflation. The Committee decided at today’s meeting to maintain the target range for the federal funds rate at 5¼ to 5½ percent and to continue the process of significantly reducing our securities holdings. We believe that our policy rate is likely at its peak for this tightening cycle and that, if the economy evolves broadly as expected, it will likely be appropriate to begin dialing back policy restraint at some point this year. But the economy has surprised forecasters in many ways since the pandemic, and ongoing progress toward our 2 percent inflation objective is not assured. The economic outlook is uncertain, and we remain highly attentive to inflation risks. We’re prepared to maintain the current target range for the federal funds rate for longer if appropriate. As labor market tightness has eased and progress on inflation has continued, the risks to achieving our employment and inflation goals are moving into better balance. We know that reducing policy restraint too soon or too much could result in a reversal of the progress we’ve seen on inflation and ultimately require even tighter policy to get inflation back to 2 percent. At the same time, reducing policy restraint too late or too little could unduly weaken economic activity and employment. In considering any adjustments to the target range for the federal funds rate, the Committee will carefully assess the incoming data, the evolving outlook, and the balance of risks. The Committee does not expect that it will be appropriate to reduce the target range until it has gained greater confidence that inflation is moving sustainably toward 2 percent. We will continue to make our decisions meeting by meeting. We remain committed to bringing inflation back down to our 2 percent goal and to keeping longer run—longer term inflation expectations well anchored. Restoring price stability is essential to set the stage for achieving maximum employment and stable prices over the longer run. To conclude: We understand that our actions affect communities, families, and businesses across the country. Everything we do is in service to our public mission. We at the Fed will do everything we can to achieve our maximum employment and price stability goals. Thank you. I look forward to our questions. . Sorry—say that last part again. . Okay. So, what are we looking for to get greater confidence? Let me say that we have confidence. We’re—we’re looking for greater confidence that inflation is moving sustainably down to 2 percent. Implicitly, we do have confidence, and it has been increasing, but we want to get greater confidence. What do we want to see? We want to see more good data. It’s not that we’re looking for better data. It’s—we’re looking at continuation of the good data that we’ve been seeing, and a good example is inflation. So we have six months of good inflation data. The question really is, that six months of good inflation data—is it sending us a true signal that we are, in fact, on a path—a sustainable path down to 2 percent inflation? That’s the question. And the answer will come from some more data that’s also good data. It doesn’t—it’s not that the six month data isn’t—isn’t low enough. It is. It’s just a question of, can we take that with confidence that we’re moving sustainably down to 2 percent? That’s really what we’re thinking about. In terms of, of growth, we’ve had strong growth. I mean, if you take a step back, we’ve had strong growth—very strong growth [in real GDP] last year—going right into the fourth quarter. And yet we’ve had a very strong labor market, and we’ve had inflation coming down. So I think—whereas a year ago, we, we were thinking that we needed to see some softening in economic activity—that hasn’t been the case. So I think we, we look at—we look at stronger growth. We don’t look at it as a problem. I think, at this point, we want to see strong growth. We want to see a strong labor market. We’re not looking for a weaker labor market. We’re looking for inflation to continue to come down, as it has been coming down for the last six months. . No, I think it’s—I, I would say it, it seems—it seems to be the likely case that, that we will achieve that confidence, but we have to achieve it, and we haven’t yet. And so—I mean, it’s a good story. We have six months of good inflation [readings]. But you can—and you know this—you can look behind those numbers, and you can see that a lot of it’s been coming from goods inflation, for example, and goods inflation running significantly negative. It’s a reasonable assumption that, over time, goods inflation will flatten out—probably approximate zero. That would mean the services sectors would have to contribute more. So, in other words, what we care about is the aggregate number—not so much the composition. But we, we just need to see more. That’s where we are, as a Committee. We need to see more evidence that sort of confirms what we think we’re seeing and that tells us that we are on—gives us confidence that we’re on, on a path to—a sustainable path down to 2 percent inflation. . So, as you know, almost every participant on the Committee does believe that it will be appropriate to reduce rates and for, for—partly for the reasons that you say. You know, we, we feel like inflation is coming down. Growth has been strong. The labor market is strong. We’re—what we’re trying to do is identify a place where we’re really confident about inflation getting back down to 2 percent so that we can then begin the process of dialing back the restrictive level. So, overall, I think—I think people do believe—and, as you know, the median participant wrote down three rate cuts this year. But I think to get to that place where we feel comfortable starting the process, we need some confirmation that inflation is, in fact, coming down sustainably to 2 percent. . Well, I—look, I think, as you know, we consult the range of Taylor rules and, and non Taylor kind of rules. We consult them regularly. They’re in our, our Tealbook, and, and they’re in all the materials that we look at. But, you know, I don’t think we’ve ever been at a—at a place where we were—where we were setting policy by them. And there—depending on the rule, it will tell you different things. There are many different formulations. Another way to think about it is, implicitly, is—so, in theory, of course, real rates go up if—holding all else equal—as inflation comes down. But that doesn’t mean we can mechanically adjust policy as real rates—sorry—as inflation comes down. It doesn’t mean that at all, because, for one thing, we, we don’t know—we, we look at more than just the fed funds rate. We look at—broadly—financial conditions. But, in addition, we don’t know with great confidence where the neutral rate of interest is at any given time. But that also doesn’t mean that we wait around for—to see, you know, the economy turn down, because that would be too late. So we’re really in a risk management mode: of managing the risk—as I mentioned in my opening remarks—managing the risk that we move too soon and move too late. And I think to move, which is—which is where almost everyone on the Committee is—is in favor of, of moving rates down this year—but the timing of that is going to be linked to our gaining confidence that inflation is on a sustainable path down to 2 percent. . Yeah, I, I don’t know that we’ve worked out the particulars— statement language and that kind of thing. I would just say, if you look at—you know, look at where, where 12 month inflation is, and it’s, you know, it’s still well above—core is 2.9 percent, for example—12 month—which is way down from where it was. Very, very positive development—very fast decline—and, and, you know, the, the case is likely that it will continue to come down. So, so that’s where—that’s where it is. But we’re, you know, we’re wanting to see, you know, more data. . Yes. So let me say that we’re not looking for that. That’s not something we’re looking for. But, yes, if you think about, you know—in, in the base case, the economy is performing well—the labor market remains strong. If we saw an unexpected weakening in, in—certainly in the labor market, that would certainly weigh on cutting sooner. Absolutely. And if we saw inflation being stickier or higher or those sorts of things—would argue for moving later. In the base case, though, where, where the economy is healthy and we have, you know, we have ongoing growth—solid growth—we have a strong labor market—we have inflation coming down—that’s what people are writing their SEP [submissions] around. And in that case, what we’re saying is, based on that, we think we can and should take advantage of that and, and be careful as we approach that question of when to begin to dial back restriction. . So we’re not—we’re not really at that stage. You know, we’re— we’re—there was no proposal to cut rates. Some people did, you know, talk about their view of the rate path. I would point you to the [December 2023] SEP as, as, you know, as good evidence of where people are, although it is—it is [now] one [FOMC meeting] cycle later. So, you know, we’re not—we’re not at a place of, of really working out those kinds of details, because we weren’t actively considering, you know, a—moving, moving the federal funds rate down. I will say, there is a—there is a wide disparity—a healthy disparity—of views, and you see that in public, public statements, in the minutes, and the transcripts when they’re released every five years. So we do have a healthy set of differences, and I think that’s actually essential for making good policy. We’re also able to reach agreement, generally, because we listen to each other— we, we compromise. And even though not everybody loves what we do, they’re able to—for the most part—able to join in. To me, that’s a well functioning public institution. . Including? . Yeah. Well, so we’re not—you know, it’s not the pandemic, so we can actually rely on more, more traditional forms. People are working. They’re getting wages, and, and the economy has largely reopened and is broadly normalizing, as you see. So I wouldn’t say we’re looking at that, that sort of more innovative data as much. You know, you point to rents. So, of course, we follow the, the components of inflation very carefully. Which would be: Goods inflation—I talked about that a little bit  you mentioned housing inflation. So the question is, when will these lower market rents find their way into measured rents, as measured, measured in PCE inflation? And we think that’s coming, and we know it’s coming. It’s just a question of when and, and how big it’ll be. So—but that’s in, in everyone’s forecast, I would say. So that will—that will help. But at the same time, we think goods inflation will probably—it’s been giving a lot of disinflation to the effort—and probably that declines over time, but it may well have some, some more time to run. You know, these—the supply chains are not perfectly back to where they were. In addition, it takes time for the, the healing process to get into prices. So there may be still a tailwind. We’ll find out with, with that. So we look at the things that relate to our mandate very carefully, and—as you would imagine. . No, I wouldn’t—I wouldn’t say we’ve achieved that. And I, I think we have—we have a ways to go. Inflation is still—you know, core inflation is still well above target on a 12 month basis. Twelve months is our, our target, certainly. I’m encouraged, and we’re encouraged by the progress. But, you know, we’re, we’re not—we’re not declaring victory at all at this point. We think we have a ways to go. . So it’s—I think you, you do see in the interest sensitive parts of the economy—you do see, for example, housing. You see the effects. You do. Your, your second question, though, really, I think, is important, and that is, a lot of this has come through—a lot of the disinflationary process has come through the healing of supply chains and also of the labor market. So you’ve seen the—you know, that other set of factors is really different from other cycles and has brought that working with tighter, tighter policy, which has enabled the supply side to recover—I think is that, that mixture has been behind what has enabled this. So, no—we really do think that we’re having an effect broadly across the economy. I would point to the interest sensitive parts of the economy as well as spending, generally. But it’s a—it’s a joint story. It’s a complicated story. . It’s—so I think it’s, it’s—of course, you know that it’s not something you can identify with any precision. But if you—a standard approach would be to take the nominal rate—5.3 percent, let’s say—and subtract sort of a, a forward measure of inflation. If you do that—and there are many, many ways to calculate the neutral rate—but that’s one I like to do. And, you know, you’re going to get to something that is materially above mainstream estimates of neutrality—of the neutral rate—you will. And—but at the same time, you look at the economy, and you say, “This is an economy that grew 3.1 percent last year.” And, and you say, “What does that tell you about the neutral rate?” What’s happening, though, is, the supply side has been recovering in the middle of this. So that, that won’t go on forever. So a lot of the growth we’re seeing is not—is—it isn’t just a tug of war between, between interest rates and demand. You’re getting, you know, more activity because of the—of labor market healing and supply chains healing. So I think the question is, when that peters out, I think the, the, you know, the, the restriction will show up probably more, more sharply. . I, I think the labor market by many measures is at or nearing normal—but not totally back to normal. And you pointed to one or more of them. So I think, you know, job openings are not quite back to where they were. Wages—wage increases, rather, are not quite back to where they—to where they would need to be in the longer run. I, I would look at it this way, though. The, the economy is broadly normalizing, and so is the labor market. And that process will probably take some time. So wage setting is something that happens—it’s, it’s—you know, probably will take a couple of years to get all the way back. And that’s okay. That’s okay. But we do see—you saw today’s ECI reading—you know, the evidence is that, that wage increases are still at a healthy level—very healthy level—but they’re gradually moving back to levels that would be more associated—given, given assumptions about productivity, are more typically associated with 2 percent inflation. It’s, it’s an ongoing process—a healthy one— and, and, you know, I think we’re, we’re moving in the right direction. . I think the, the labor market is—it—I don’t know if I’d—it’s rebalancing. Clearly, that the—there was a fairly severe imbalance between demand for workers and supply at the beginning of the pandemic. So we lost several million workers at the beginning of the pandemic from people dropping out of the labor force. And then when the economy reopened—you remember 2021—you had a severe labor shortage, and it was just—it was everywhere—panic on the part of businesses—couldn’t, couldn’t find people. So, what’s happened is—we expected labor—the labor supply—labor market to come back quickly, and it didn’t. And 2022 was a disappointing year, and, you know, we were kind of thinking, “Well, maybe we won’t get it back.” And then 2023, we did, as you know—so labor force participation came back strongly in ’23, and so did immigration. Immigration came to a halt during the pandemic. So—and so those two forces have significantly lowered the temperature in the labor market to what is still a very strong labor market. It’s still a good labor market for wages and for finding a job, but it’s getting back into balance, and that’s what we want to see. And, you know, one great way to look at that is what’s happening with, with wage increases. And you see it now across the, the major things that we—that we track. It isn’t every quarter, but, overall, there’s a clear trend—still at high levels, but back down to where—what would be consistent with, with where we were before the pandemic and with 2 percent inflation. . No, I think that that is a risk—the risk that inflation would, would reaccelerate. I think the, the greater risk is that it would—that it would stabilize at a level meaningfully above 2 percent. That’s, that’s, to me, more likely. Of course, if—if inflation were to surprise by moving back up, that would—we would have to respond to that, and that would— that would be a surprise at this point. But I have to tell you, that’s why we keep our options open here and why we’re not, you know, rushing. So I, I think both of those are risks, but I think the more likely risk is the one that I mentioned, which is, you’ve had six good months—very good months—but what, what’s really going to “shake out” here? You know, where—what will— when we look back, what will we see? Will, will inflation have dipped and then come back up? Are the last six months flattered by factors that are—that are one off factors that won’t repeat themselves? We don’t think so. We don’t—you know, that’s not what we think, but that’s the question we are asking. We have to ask [that], and we want to get comfort on that. . We’ll just have to see. Yeah. We’ll—we look at those. Last year was a—was a, a surprise. . So, how to—your first question—how to describe where we are? So I guess I would just say this—executive summary would be that growth is solid to strong over the course of last year. The labor market—3.7 percent unemployment indicates that the labor market is strong. We’ve had just about two years now of, of unemployment under 4 percent. That hasn’t happened in 50 years. So it’s a good labor market. And we’ve seen inflation come down. We’ve talked about that. So we’ve got six months of good inflation data and an expectation that there’s more to come. So this is a—this is a good situation. Let’s be honest. This is a—this is a good economy. But what’s the outlook? That’s looking in the rearview—the outlook—we do expect growth to moderate. Of course, we have expected it for some time, and it hasn’t happened, but we do expect that it will moderate as supply chain and labor market normalization runs its course. The labor market is rebalancing, as, as I mentioned. Job creation has slowed. The base of job growth has narrowed. And, of course, 12 month inflation is, is above target and getting, you know, getting down closer to target. It’s not guaranteed, but we do seem to be getting on track for that. So those are the risks and, and questions we have to answer. But, overall, this is a pretty good picture. It, it is a good picture. Your second question was—sorry. . So we—the thing is, we’re not looking for inflation to tap the 2 percent base once. We’re looking for it to settle out over time at 2 percent. And the same thing is true if we have a month or two of lower—and we have that now—of, of inflation that’s annualized at a—at a lower level—that wouldn’t be good. We’re not—you know, we’re not looking to have inflation anchor below 2 percent. We’re looking to have it anchor at 2 percent. So if we do face those circumstances, then we’ll have to deal with that. I think—I think as of now, you know, the, the question, which—we want to take advantage of this situation and finish the job on inflation while keeping the labor market strong. . So I’ll point you to that language on your first question. We, we included that language in the statement to signal clearly that—with strong growth, strong labor market, inflation coming down—the Committee intends to move carefully as we consider when to begin to dial back the restrictive stance that we have in place. So if you take that to the current context—current context, we’re going to be data dependent. We’re going to be looking at this meeting by meeting. Based on the meeting today, I would tell you that I don’t think it’s likely that the Committee will reach a level of confidence by the time of the March meeting to identify March as the time to do that. But that’s, that’s to be seen. So I wouldn’t call—you know, when you say—when you ask me about “in the near term,” I’m hearing that as March. I would say I don’t think that’s—that’s, that’s probably not the most likely case or what we would call the base case. And your second question is— . You know, that’s going to depend on the data. The whole thing is, this is going to depend on the data. We’re going to be looking at the economic data as it affects the outlook and the balance of risks. And we’re going to make our decisions based on that. And it could wind up—you know, we’ll, we’ll have another SEP at the March meeting, and, and people will write down what they think. But, in the end, it’s really going to depend on how the economy evolves. We talked about, there are risks that would cause us to go slower—for example, stronger inflation—more, more persistent inflation. There are risks that would cause us to—if they happen—that would cause us to go faster or—and sooner. And that would be a weakening in the labor market or, for that matter, very, very persuasive lower inflation. Those are the kinds of things. So we’re just—we’re just going to be reacting to the data. That’s the— that’s really the only way we can do this. . So this is a really interesting question. And I think—my, my own view is—I think if you look, look back to the pandemic, you, you saw a spike in productivity as workers were laid off, and, and activity didn’t decline as fast. And then you saw a deep trough of productivity. And then, over the last—you saw high productivity last year, in ’23. I think we’re, we’re basically in the throes of getting through the pandemic economy. And the question will be, what, what is it that has changed the—you know, the productivity tends to be based on, you know, fundamental aspects of our economy. Is there—is there a case—will it be the case that we come out of this more productive on a sustained basis? And I don’t know. I don’t know. What would it take? It would take—you know, people talk about AI, but I would—my guess is that we may shake out and be back where we were, because I don’t—I’m not sure I see—work from home doesn’t seem like it’s a big productivity increase. Or AI, artificial intelligence— generative it may be, but probably not in the short run—probably, maybe in the longer run. So I’m not—I’m not seeing why it would, but, you know, right—you know, right now I would say that productivity is kind of what falls out of the, the broader forces that are driving people in and out of the labor force and, and activity returning and supply chains getting fixed. . That’s one way to look at it. Yeah. . So when we think about, you know—our, our statutory goals are maximum employment and price stability, and that’s what we’re targeting. We’re not targeting housing price inflation, the cost of housing, or any of those things. Those are very important things for people’s lives. But they’re not—you know, those are not the things we’re targeting. We’re also well aware that when we cut rates at the beginning of the pandemic, for example, the housing, housing industry was helped more than any other industry. And when we raise rates, the housing industry can be hurt, because it’s a very interest sensitive sector. On top of that, we have longer run problems with the availability of housing. You know, we have a, a built up set of cities, and, and, you know, people are moving further and further out. So there’s—there hasn’t been enough housing built. And these are not—these are not things that we have any tools to address. But, you know, where it comes into play very specifically in our work is inflation, which is a combination. It’s, it’s really rental inflation. You’re taking owners’ equivalent rent and then actual rent paid by tenants. And you’re, you’re running that through the CPI calculation. Or the PCE [inflation] calculation—the one we look at. And what that’s telling you is that market rents are increasing at a much lower rate or even being flat and that that will show up in inflation over time. It has to as long as that remains the case. . My response is what I started with, which is that our, our job—the job Congress has given us is price stability and maximum employment. Price stability is absolutely essential for people’s lives, most importantly for—well, not most importantly—most, mostly for people at the lower end of the income spectrum who are living at the edges—at the margins. And so someone—for someone like that, high inflation in the—in the necessities of life—right away, you’re in trouble, whereas even middle class people have some, you know, some scope to absorb higher costs. So we have to get—it’s our job. It’s what society has asked us to do, is to get inflation down, and the tools that we use to do it are interest rates. So that’s how we think about that. . Yes. So I would start by saying that balance sheet runoff so far has gone very well. And as the process has continued, you know, we’re getting to that time where questions are beginning to come into greater focus about the pace of runoff and all that. So at this meeting, we did have some discussion of the balance sheet, and we’re planning to begin in  depth discussions of balance sheet issues at our next meeting in March. So those, those questions are all coming into scope now, and we’re focusing on them. But we’re, we’re at the beginning of that process, I would say. . Yes, we do—we see those as independent tools. And so they don’t—for example, if you’re—if you’re normalizing policy, you might be reducing rates but continuing to run off the balance sheet. In both cases, that’s normalization, but from a strict monetary policy standpoint, you could say we’re loosening along with tightening. So that, that could happen. It’s not something we’re planning or thinking about, but right now, we’re thinking about getting to a place where—we’re going to see the balance sheet runoff to continue. We’re watching it carefully, and, as I said, we’ll—we’ll be looking into that as a Committee starting in March. . I’m, I’m not in a position to put a number on it. I’m just going to say—and it’s not that we don’t have any confidence. We, we have growing confidence, but not to the point where we—where we feel like—it’s a highly consequential decision to start the process of, of dialing back on restriction. And we want to get that right, and we feel like the strong economy, strong labor market, inflation coming down—it gives us the ability to do that. We think that’s the best way we can serve the public, because, ultimately, we, we’ve made a lot of progress on inflation. We just want to make sure that we do get the job done in a sustainable way. That’s how we’re thinking about it. In terms of when that’ll be, you know, that, that’ll all come out of our communications, and, you know, we won’t—we won’t keep that a secret. . Not a decision that we’ve made, but I, I wouldn’t think we’d, we’d be—we wouldn’t be taking a position that it’s got to go to zero. I mean, if it—if it were to stabilize at a different level—but that’s, that’s not a decision that we’ve made. That’s, that’s what we’ll be talking about at the March meeting. A whole range of issues will be briefed up, and the Committee will get into—get into all of the issues that will be arising over the course of the next, let’s say, year or so. . I don’t have a stance on that. It’s not something I’m focused on. [We’re] focused on doing our jobs. We have—this year is going to be a highly consequential year for, for the Fed and for monetary policy. And we’re, all of us, very buckled down, focused on doing our jobs. . So I—you know, we’re going to do—we’ll update our, our inflation forecasts at the next meeting. You referred to the December meeting. That’s, that’s, you know, three months old [by March], so it might be lower now, given the data we’ve gotten. So, look, as I mentioned, we’re going to be reacting to the data. If, if we get—if we get very strong inflation data and it, it kicks back up, then it’ll—then we’ll go slower or later or both. If we got really good inflation data soon, that would matter for both the—that, that would tell us that, that we could go sooner and perhaps go faster. So we’re just going to be—but, of course, we’ll weigh that with all the other factors. We’re setting policy based on the totality of, of the data. . Well, I think if we—if we came to the view that, that inflation were—that the six month inflation numbers, which are very close to 2 [percent], were, in “PCE world”—if we came to—if that’s—if we thought that is really where we’re going to be, then, yes, our policy would be in a different place. It would. But, you know, that’s the whole point is, we’re trying to get comfortable and gain confidence that that is where—that inflation is on a sustainable path down to 2 percent or toward 2 percent. . Yeah, so it’s been—it’s been interesting that confidence surveys have been weak, at a time when unemployment has been low—very low, historically low—for a couple of years. And—but, nonetheless, that’s been the case. And we’ve asked ourselves why that is. And, you know, one obvious answer—we don’t pretend to have perfect wisdom on this—is—but one obvious answer is that the price level is high. So prices went up much more than 2 percent for year—per year for a couple of years. And people are going to the store, and they’re paying much more for the basics of life than they were two years ago—three years ago. And they’re not happy about it. And it’s fine that inflation is coming down, but the price—the prices they’re paying are still high. So that, that is what—that, that has to be some part of why people are unhappy. And they’re, they’re right to be unhappy. You know, this is why we need to keep price stability. It’s why we need to do our jobs—so that people don’t have to deal with things like this. In terms of [surveys]—you’re right. In, in recent, recent surveys, a couple of—you’ve seen a couple of significant increases in, in consumer confidence or, or happiness with the economy. I guess that’s a good thing. That can—that can support spending—can support economic activity. There’s some evidence of that. But it is—it is a fact that we have seen, you know, a meaningful increase. I think levels of confidence are still maybe not as high as they’ve been at various times. But it’s—they certainly have come up. . Well, yes. I’m, I’m a big believer that—yes. So we, we do meet with outside groups who come from all different parts of the economy. And I always feel like you—I mean, I spent most of my life in the private sector looking at companies—individual companies—individual management teams—and then building out from that. And so, starting with GDP data is—and working into what’s actually affecting people’s lives is—is challenging. It’s very hard. So I, I really like anecdotal data. In addition, as you know, the 12 Reserve Banks have really the best network of anyone. In all their Districts, they’re talking to, you know, not just the business community, but the educational, medical, all, all—you know, nonprofit community. They have arms into all of that. And so when they come back—that’s what goes into the Beige Book. But they come back, and what each Reserve Bank president does is, during the outlook go around, they’ll say, “In my District . . .” And they’ll talk about 100 conversations they—not—they won’t talk—they, they will give you input, based on 100 conversations that they’ve had with people of all different walks. And it’s—I personally find it very helpful in understanding what’s going on. And also, I think you hear things before they show up in the data sometimes. . Yes. I mean, if you—if you look back at the last—not this Beige Book, but the one before, it was more—there was a lot of “slower activity.” I think that, that what you’re hearing now is, is, things are picking up a bit. You’re hearing—not, not in every District and not every, every person that we talk to, but you’re—overall, it feels like you’re hearing things picking up at the margin. So that’s what comes through. . I’m not so worried about that. You know, it’s—again, we’ve had inflation come down without a slow economy and without, you know, important increases in, in unemployment, and there’s no reason why we should want to get in the way of that process, if it’s going to continue. So I, I am—you know, I think—I think declining inflation—continued declines in inflation are, are really the main thing we’re looking at. Of course, we want the labor market to remain strong, too. We don’t have a growth mandate. We’ve got a, a maximum employment mandate and a, a price stability mandate, and those are the two things we look at. Growth only matters to the extent it influences our achievement of those two—of those two mandates. Thank you very much.

****FOMCpresconf20240320

. Good afternoon. My colleagues and I remain squarely focused on our dual mandate to promote maximum employment and stable prices for the American people. The economy has made considerable progress toward our dual mandate objectives. Inflation has eased substantially while the labor market has remained strong, and that is very good news. But inflation is still too high, ongoing progress in bringing it down is not assured, and the path forward is uncertain. We are fully committed to returning inflation to our 2 percent goal. Restoring price stability is essential to achieve a sustainably strong labor market that benefits all. Today, the FOMC decided to leave our policy interest rate unchanged and to continue to reduce our securities holdings. Our restrictive stance of monetary policy has been putting downward pressure on economic activity and inflation. As labor market tightness has eased and progress on inflation has continued, the risks to achieving our employment and inflation goals are moving into better balance. I will have more to say about monetary policy after briefly reviewing economic developments. Recent indicators suggest that economic activity has been expanding at a solid pace. GDP growth in the fourth quarter of last year came in at 3.2 percent. For 2023 as a whole, GDP expanded 3.1 percent, bolstered by strong consumer demand as well as improving supply conditions. Activity in the housing sector was subdued over the past year, largely reflecting high mortgage rates. High interest rates also appear to have weighed on business fixed investment. In our Summary of Economic Projections, Committee participants generally expect GDP growth to slow from last year’s pace, with a median projection of 2.1 percent this year and 2 percent over the next two years. Participants generally revised up their growth projections since December, reflecting the strength of incoming data, including data on labor supply. The labor market remains relatively tight, but supply and demand conditions continue to come into better balance. Over the past three months, payroll job gains averaged 265,000 jobs per month. The unemployment rate has edged up but remains low at 3.9 percent. Strong job creation has been accompanied by an increase in the supply of workers, reflecting increases in participation among individuals aged 25 to 54 years and a continued strong pace of immigration. Nominal wage growth has been easing, and job vacancies have declined. Although the jobs to  workers gap has narrowed, labor demand still exceeds the supply of available workers. FOMC participants expect the rebalancing in the labor market to continue, easing upward pressure on inflation. The median unemployment rate projection in the SEP is 4.0 percent at the end of this year and 4.1 percent at the end of next year. Inflation has eased notably over the past year but remains above our longer run goal of 2 percent. Estimates based on the consumer price index and other data indicate that total PCE prices rose 2.5 percent over the 12 months ending in February and that, excluding the volatile food and energy categories, core PCE prices rose 2.8 percent. Longer term inflation expectations appear to remain well anchored, as reflected in a broad range of surveys of households, businesses, and forecasters as well as from measures from financial markets. The median projection in the SEP for total PCE inflation falls to 2.4 percent this year, 2.2 percent next year, and 2 percent in 2026. The Fed’s monetary policy actions are guided by our mandate to promote maximum employment and stable prices for the American people. My colleagues and I are acutely aware that high inflation imposes significant hardship as it erodes purchasing power, especially for those least able to meet the higher costs of essentials like food, housing, and transportation. We are strongly committed to returning inflation to our 2 percent objective. The Committee decided at today’s meeting to maintain the target range for the federal funds rate at 5¼ to 5½ percent and to continue the process of significantly reducing our securities holdings. As labor market tightness has eased and progress on inflation has continued, the risks to achieving our employment and inflation goals are coming into better balance. We believe that our policy rate is likely at its peak for this tightening cycle and that, if the economy evolves broadly as expected, it will likely be appropriate to begin dialing back policy restraint at some point this year. The economic outlook is uncertain, however, and we remain highly attentive to inflation risks. We are prepared to maintain the current target range for the federal funds rate for longer, if appropriate. We know that reducing policy restraint too soon or too much could result in a reversal of the progress we have seen on inflation and ultimately require even tighter policy to get inflation back to 2 percent. At the same time, reducing policy restraint too late or too little could unduly weaken economic activity and employment. In considering any adjustments to the target range for the federal funds rate, the Committee will carefully assess incoming data, the evolving outlook, and the balance of risks. The Committee does not expect it will be appropriate to reduce the target range until it has gained greater confidence that inflation is moving sustainably down toward 2 percent. Of course, we’re committed to both sides of our dual mandate, and an unexpected weakening in the labor market could also warrant a policy response. We will continue to make our decisions meeting by meeting. In our SEP, FOMC participants wrote down their individual assessments of an appropriate path for the federal funds rate based on what each participant judges to be the most likely scenario going forward. If the economy evolves as projected, the median participant projects that the appropriate level of the federal funds rate will be 4.6 percent at the end of this year, 3.9 percent at the end of 2025, and 3.1 percent at the end of 2026, still above the medium— median longer term funds rate. These projections are not a Committee decision or plan  if the economy does not evolve as projected, the path for policy will adjust as appropriate to foster our maximum employment and price stability goals. Turning to our balance sheet, our securities holdings have declined by nearly $1.5 trillion since the Committee began reducing our portfolio. At this meeting, we discussed issues related to slowing the pace of decline in our securities holdings. While we did not make any decisions today on this, the general sense of the Committee is that it will be appropriate to slow the pace of runoff fairly soon, consistent with the plans we previously issued. The decision to slow the pace of runoff does not mean that our balance sheet will ultimately shrink by less than it would otherwise but rather allows us to approach that ultimate level more gradually. In particular, slowing the pace of runoff will help ensure a smooth transition, reducing the possibility that money markets experience stress and thereby facilitating the ongoing decline in our securities holdings consistent with reaching the appropriate level of ample reserves. We remain committed to bringing inflation back down to our 2 percent goal and to keeping our longer term inflation expectations well anchored. Restoring price stability is essential to set the stage for achieving maximum employment and price stability over the long term. To conclude: We understand that our actions affect communities, families, and businesses across the country. Everything we do is in service to our public mission. We, at the Fed, will do everything we can to achieve our maximum employment and price stability goals. Thank you. . Well, it doesn’t—no, it doesn’t mean that. What it means is that, you know, we’ve seen incoming—as I pointed out in my opening remarks, we did mark up our growth forecast and so have many other forecasters, so the economy is performing, performing well. And the inflation data came in a little bit higher is a separate matter, and I think that caused people to write up their inflation. But nonetheless, we continue to make good progress on bringing inflation down. And so— . We’re strongly committed to bringing inflation down to 2 percent over time. That is—that is our goal, and we will achieve that goal. Markets believe we will achieve that goal. And they should believe that, because that’s what—that’s what will happen over time. But we stress “over time.” And so I think we’re, we’re making projections that do show that happening. And we’re committed to that outcome, and we will bring it about. . So I think there’s some confidence that the market rents—lower market rent increases that we’re seeing will show up in measures of housing services inflation over time. There’s a little bit of uncertainty about when that will happen, but there’s real confidence that they will show up eventually over time. But, again, uncertainty about the exact timing of that. . We will get aggregate inflation down to 2 percent over time. We will. And, and I would assume that we’ll continue to see is—we’ll see goods prices coming into a new equilibrium where they’re going down perhaps not as quickly as they had been earlier this year, where housing services inflation will come back down as, as current market rents are suggesting will happen and where nonhousing services will move back down. Some combination of those three things—and it may be different from the combination we had before the pandemic—will be achieved and will bring inflation back down to 2 percent sustainably. . It’s more—I would put it more in the context of what I said in our— in my opening remarks that the risks are really two sided here. We—we’re in a situation where, you know, if we ease—if we ease too much or too soon, we could see inflation come back, and if we ease too late, we could do unnecessary harm to employment and people’s working lives. And so, you know, we do see the risks as two sided, so it is consequential. We want to be careful. And, fortunately, with the economy growing, with the labor market strong, and with inflation coming down, we can approach that question carefully and let the data speak on that. That’s really what I was thinking. . I want to start by being—saying I always try to be careful about dismissing data that we don’t like. So you need to check yourself on that, and I’ll do that. But— so I would say the January number, which was very high—the January CPI and PCE numbers were quite high. There’s reason to think that there could be seasonal effects there. But, nonetheless, we don’t want to be completely dismissive of it. The February number was high, higher than expectations, but we have it at currently well below 30 basis points core PCE, which is not terribly high. So it’s not like the January number. But I take the two of them together, and I think they haven’t really changed the overall story, which is that of inflation moving down gradually on a sometimes bumpy road toward 2 percent. I don’t think that story has changed. I also don’t think that those readings added to anyone’s confidence that we’re moving closer to, to that point. But, you know, we didn’t—the last thing I’ll say is we didn’t excessively celebrate the good inflation readings we got in the last seven months of last year. We didn’t take too much signal out of that. What you heard us saying was that we needed to see more that we could, you know—we wanted to be careful about that decision, and we’re not going to overreact, as well, to these two months of data, nor are we going to ignore them. . Yeah. So we make decisions meeting by meeting. And we didn’t make any decisions about future meetings today. Those are going to depend on our ongoing assessment of the incoming data, the evolving outlook, and the balance of risks. So I really don’t have anything for you on any specific meeting, looking forward. . We’ll take—you know, things can happen during an intermeeting period, if you look back—unexpected things. So I don’t want to—I wouldn’t want to dismiss anything. So I just would say that the Committee wants to see more data that gives us higher confidence that inflation is moving down sustainably toward 2 percent. I also mentioned—and we don’t see this in the data right now, but if there were a significant weakening in the data, particularly in the labor market, that could also be a reason for us to begin the process of reducing rates. Again, I don’t—there’s nothing in the data pointing at that, but those are the things that we’ll be looking at, at coming meetings and—without trying to refer to any specific meeting. . So you’re right. They’re pretty modest changes, but you’re right. There was an uptick in the longer run rate, and also there’s a 25 basis point increase in ’25 and ’26. In terms of, are rates going to be higher in the longer run, if that’s really your question, I don’t think we know that. I think it’s, it’s—we think that rates were generally low during the pre pandemic post–Global Financial Crisis era for reasons that are mostly, you know, important, slow moving, large things like demographics and productivity and that sort of thing—things that don’t move quickly. But I don’t think we know. I mean, my instinct would be that rates will not go back down to the very low levels that we saw, where, all around the world, there were long  run [real interest] rates that were at or below zero in some cases. I don’t see rates going back down to that level. But I think there’s tremendous uncertainty around that. . I think that that higher year end number reflects the data we’ve seen so far this year because you’re now—you’re now in this year. So I think that—sorry, say your last part of your question again. . I, you know, I think, if you look at the SEP, what it says is that it is still likely in most people’s view that we will achieve that confidence and that there will be rate cuts. But that’s really going to depend on the incoming data. It is. The other thing is, in the second half of the year, you have some pretty low readings, so it might be harder to make progress as you move that 12 month window forward. Nonetheless, we’re looking for data that confirm the kind of low readings that we had last year and give us a higher degree of confidence that what we saw was really inflation moving sustainably down to 2 percent—toward 2 percent. . Yeah. So, so, if what we’re getting is a lot of supply and a lot of demand, and that supply is actually feeding demand because workers are getting paid and they’re spending and that’s, you know—what you would have is potentially kind of what you had last year, which is a bigger economy where inflationary pressures are not increasing. In fact, they were decreasing. So you can have that if you have a continued supply side activity that we had last year with—both with supply chains and also with, with growth in the size of the labor force. . No, not all by itself. No. I mean, we saw—you saw last year very strong hiring and inflation coming down quickly. We now have a better sense that a big part of that was supply side healing, particularly with, with growth in the labor force. So, in and of itself, strong job growth is not a reason, you know, for us to be concerned about inflation. . So we think—there are many different financial conditions indicators, and you can kind of, you know, see different answers to that question. But, ultimately, we do think that financial conditions are weighing on economic activity, and we think you see that in—a great place to see it is in the labor market, where you’ve seen demand cooling off a little bit from the extremely high levels. And there I would point to job openings, quits, surveys, the hiring rate. Things like that are really demand. There are also supply side things happening, but I think those are demand side things happening. You know, we saw—that’s been a question for a while. We did see progress on inflation last year—significant progress, despite financial conditions sometimes being tighter, sometimes looser. . So I see the Committee looking at the two months of data and asking the same question you’re asking and saying we’re just going to have to see what the data show. As I mentioned, you can look at January, which is a very high reading and you can—and I think many people did see the possibility of seasonal adjustment problems there. But, again, you don’t want to—you’ve got to be careful about dismissing the parts of the data that you don’t like. So then February wasn’t, wasn’t as high, but it was higher. So the question is, what are we going to see? You know, we tend to see a little bit stronger—this is in the data—a little bit stronger inflation in the first half of the year, a little bit less strong later in the year. We’re going to— we’re going to let the data show. I don’t think we really know whether this is a bump on the road or something more. We’ll have to find out. In the meantime, the economy is strong, the labor market is strong, inflation has come way down, and that gives us the ability to approach this question carefully and feel more confident that inflation is moving down sustainably at 2 percent when we take that step to begin dialing back our restrictive policy. . It certainly hasn’t improved our confidence—it hasn’t raised anyone’s confidence. But I would say that the story is really essentially the same and that is of inflation coming down gradually toward 2 percent on a sometimes bumpy path, as I mentioned. I think that’s what you still see. We’ve got nine months of 2½ percent inflation now, and we’ve had two months of kind of bumpy inflation. We were saying that we’ll—it’s going to be a bumpy ride. We consistently said that. Now here are some bumps, and the question is, are they more than bumps? And we just don’t—we can’t know that. That’s why we are approaching this question carefully. It is very important for everyone that we serve that we do get inflation sustainably down. And I think the historical record, it’s—every situation is different, but the historical record is that you need to approach that question carefully and try to get it right the first time and not have to come back and raise rates again perhaps if you cut inappropriately— prematurely. . Have they—well, first of all, I respect our—you know, in our system of government, it is Congress that has oversight responsibility over the Fed. We place a tremendous amount of importance on our engagements with Congress and always treat them with great respect. In this case, I would say, those are, you know—our mandate is for maximum employment and price stability and the other things that we do, and that’s what we’re trying to accomplish. We’re trying to do that in a way that sustains the strong growth we’re seeing, the strong labor market we’re seeing, but allows us to make further progress with inflation. That’s how we can best serve the public and leave the other issues, which in many cases are incredibly important, such as those you mentioned, leave those to the people who have responsibility for those. . We receive these letters with respect, and we write careful responses and address concerns. We listen, again, because we’re talking to the people who, in our system of government, have oversight over our activity. So that’s—but at the end of the day, we take that on board, but we have to make our judgments, and we have to “stick to our knitting”— which is maximum employment, price stability, supervise and regulate the banks, work on the payment system: the things that we do. . We’re a very consensus oriented organization, and we do try to achieve consensus and, ideally, unanimity. People do dissent. It’s something that happens. Life goes on, and it’s not a problem. We’ve always had dissents. But—and so I—you know, you respect thoughtful dissents very much. It’s like, you may not agree with some arguments, but you really want to understand them. So you may read a book that takes a position that you have long opposed, just to understand [the position of] that book. So I treat dissents with real respect as well. . Yes. . So we, of course, monitor—it’s one of our two goal variables. We all monitor the labor market very, very carefully. And I don’t see those cracks today. And I, you know—we follow all the possible stories that are out there about, about there being cracks, but the overall picture really is a strong labor market. The extreme imbalances that we saw in the early parts of the pandemic recovery have mostly been resolved. You’re seeing high job growth. You’re seeing big increases in supply. You’re seeing strong wage growth, but wage growth is gradually moderating down to more sustainable levels. In many, many respects, the things are returning more to their state in 2019, which we can think of as normal for this purpose. That’s job openings and quits. And surveys of workers and businesses are always interesting on this: You know, how tight is the—how easy is it to find a job? How hard is it—how easy it is to find a worker? Those have both—those surveys have both come down. So the labor market is—it’s in good shape. You know, you do see things like the low— the low hiring rate, and people have made the argument that if, if layoffs were to increase, that would—that would mean that the net would be fairly quick increases in unemployment. So that’s something we’re watching, but we’re not seeing it. Of course, initial claims are very, very low and, if anything, have tracked down a little bit. So—watching it carefully. Don’t see it. And when I say something—I, I use the term “unexpected” weakening of the labor market. So, you know, we do expect the unemployment rate to—the forecast is that it would move up, I think, closer to what we see as the longer run sustainable level. That’s just—that’s just people’s forecast, individual forecasts. But we’re talking about something that’s unexpected. That’s where I’ll leave it, though. . So that is what we’re discussing essentially is—and we’re not discussing all the other many other balance sheet issues. We will discuss those in due course. But what we’re really looking at is slowing the pace of runoff. There isn't much runoff among MBS—in MBS right now, but there is in Treasuries. And we’re talking about going to a lower pace. I don’t want to give you a specific number because we haven’t made a—haven’t had an agreement or decision, but that’s the idea. And that’s what we’re looking at. In terms of the timing, I said fairly soon. I wouldn’t want to try to be more specific than that, but you get the idea. The idea is—and this is in our longer run plans—that we may actually be able to get to a lower level, because we would avoid the kind of frictions that can happen. Liquidity is not evenly distributed in a system. And there can be times when, in the aggregate, reserves are ample or even abundant, but not in every part. And those parts where they’re not ample, there can be stress, and that can cause you to prematurely stop the process to avoid the stress. And then it would be very hard to restart, we think. So something like that happened in ’19 perhaps. So that’s what we’re doing. We’re looking at what would be a good time and what would be a good structure, and “fairly soon” is words that we use to mean fairly soon. . So that—our, our longer run goal is to return to a balance sheet that is mostly Treasuries. I do expect that, once we’re through this, we’ll come back to the other issues about the composition and the maturity and revisit those issues, but it’s, you know, not urgent right now. We want to get this, this decision made first and then we can, when the time is right, come back to the other issues. . You know, we’ll be watching carefully. But one of the reasons we’re slowing down—we will soon enough, fairly soon I should say, slow down—is that we want to avoid any, any kind of that turbulence. I wasn’t thinking particularly about the banking  sector turbulence, but we—and we had some indicators the last time. This is our second time in doing this, and I think we’re going to be paying a lot of attention to the things that started to happen and that foreshadowed what eventually happened at the end of that tightening cycle where we wound up in a short[ of ]reserves situation. And we don’t want to do that again. And I think now we have a better sense of what are the indicators. It isn’t—it wasn’t so much in the banking system as it was around, for example, where federal funds are trading relative to the administered rates and where secured rates are relative to the administered rates. Those sorts of things. We will always be watching the banking system for similar signs, though. . Well, I think we broadly think that, once [take up at] the overnight [reverse] repo [facility] stabilizes, either at zero or close to zero, that, as the balance sheet shrinks, we should expect that reserves will decline pretty close to dollar for dollar with that. That’s what we think. . So it’s sort of ironic that, by going slower, you can get farther. But that’s the idea. The idea is that, with a smoother transition, you won’t—you’ll run much less risk of kind of liquidity problems, which can grow into shocks, and which can cause you to stop the process prematurely. So that’s—in terms of how it ends, we’re going to be monitoring carefully money market conditions and asking ourselves whether they—what they’re telling us about reserves. Are they—right now, we would characterize them as “abundant,” and what we’re aiming for is “ample” and, you know, which is a little bit less than abundant. So there isn’t a— you know, there’s not a dollar amount or a percent of GDP or anything like that where we think we have a really pretty clear understanding of that. We’re going to be looking at what these— what’s happening in money markets, in particular—a bunch of different indicators, including the ones I mentioned, to tell us when we’re getting close. Then, though, you reach a point ultimately where you stop allowing the balance sheet to run off and you—but then, from that point, there’s another period in which nonreserves—nonreserve liabilities grow organically, like currency, and that also shrinks the reserves at a very slow pace. So you have a, you know, a slower pace of runoff, which we’ll have fairly soon. Then you have another time where you effectively hold the balance sheet constant and allow nonreserve liabilities to expand. And then that ultimately brings you, ideally, in for—brings it into a nice, easy landing at a level that is above—you know, above what we think the lowest possible ample number would be. We’re not trying for that. We want to have a cushion, a buffer, because we know that demand for reserves can be very volatile. And we don’t want to, again, find ourselves in a situation where there aren’t reserves, and we have to turn around and buy assets and put reserves back in the banking system the way we did in 2019 and ’20. . Sure. So we’re—most importantly, we’re looking at the incoming inflation data and the contents of it and what they’re telling us, so that’ll be—and also the various components—so obviously that’s what we want. We want more confidence that inflation is coming down sustainably toward 2 percent. And, I mean, of course we’ll also be looking at all the other things that are happening in the economy. We’ll look at the totality of the data, including everything essentially as we make that assessment. But the most important thing will be the inflation data coming in. . Wages is one thing. We don’t—our target is not wages. It’s really inflation. But we would look to the fact that wages are still coming in very strong. But, but they’ve been—wage increases, that’s to say—wage increases have been quite strong, but they’re, they’re gradually coming down to levels that are more sustainable over time. And that’s what we want. We don’t think that—the inflation was not originally caused—we think, I don’t think, by mostly by wages. That wasn’t really the story. But we do think that, to get inflation back down to 2 percent sustainably, we’d like to see, you know, continuing gradual movement of wage increases at still high levels but back down to levels that are more sustainable over time. . I guess I’d put it this way: The—if you look at the incoming inflation data that we’ve had for January and February, I think very broadly that suggests that we were right to wait until we’re more confident. So I think, I think—I didn’t hear anyone dismissing it as not information that we should look at or anything like that. So I think, generally speaking, it does go in the direction of saying, yes, it’s appropriate for us to be careful as we approach this question. . Sure. So I think we’ve been pretty transparent on this, but I will— I’ll try harder. So we are not getting ready to—we haven’t proposed—we haven’t come to a conclusion that we should propose, or anything like that, that Congress consider legislation to authorize a digital dollar. And it would take legislation by Congress signed by the President to give us the ability to do what we think of as a CBDC, which is really a retail CBDC with the public. So we’re just a long, long way from that. What we are doing, and I think what every major central bank is doing, is we’re trying to stay in the frontiers of what’s going on in digital finance, and it has many, many different areas. It has applications in wholesale finance, in the payment system, and so we need—to serve the public—these issues have become very front burner in the last five or six years—we need to be knowledgeable about all that. So we actually do have people trying to understand things that are—but it’s wrong to say that we’re working on a CBDC and that we’ve secretly got a lab here where we’ve got one, and we’re just going to spring it on Congress at the right moment. We don’t. I haven’t at all, in my own mind, made a decision that I think this is something the U.S. should be doing. I just think it’s something we need to be—we need to understand. We do have people who are keeping up with that, as part of the broader payments landscape. That’s, that’s how I would characterize it. . I generally think—I mean, this movement actually started 30 years ago—30 years ago, when some academics posited that a more transparent central bank, if the public understands your reaction function, the markets will do your work for you. They’ll react to the data. And so it all happens that way and so there’s been a march toward greater and greater transparency. And that—certainly Chairman Bernanke advanced that, Chairman Greenspan did, Chair Yellen did, and I. You know, so we went from four press conferences a year to eight, so now every meeting really is “live” now. I think that’s a good innovation. I wouldn’t want to turn it back. We also have done a bunch of other things. You know, we have an annual supervision report, Financial Stability Report. I mean, there’s a long list of things that we’ve done. I think you—I mean, nothing comes to mind as really desperately in need of doing at this moment. We’re very transparent. We have no shortage of FOMC participants speaking to the public through the media. And so that channel is full, I would say. So I think it’s generally broadly helped and made things better. But not every day and in every way. . Of course not. [Laughter] . So let me say my main message at that—in those two days of hearings was really that the Committee needs to see more evidence to build our confidence that inflation is moving down sustainably toward our 2 percent goal, and we don’t expect that it will be appropriate to begin to reduce rates until we’re more confident that that is the case. I said that any number of times, so those were kind of the main part of the message. We repeated that today in our statement. I also—to the language you mentioned, I, I really pointed out that we had made significant progress over the past year, and what we’re looking for now is confirmation that that progress will continue. We had a series of inflation readings over the second half of last year that were really much lower. We didn’t overreact, as I mentioned. But that’s what I had in mind. . Well, we’ll just have to see how the data come in. We would, of course, love to get great inflation data. We got really good inflation data on the second—in the second part of last year. Again, we didn’t overreact to it. We said we needed to see more, and we said it would be bumpy. And now we have January and February, which I’ve talked about a couple of times. So, you know, we’re looking for more good data, and we would certainly welcome it. Thank you.

****FOMCpresconf20240501

. Good afternoon. My colleagues and I remain squarely focused on our dual mandate to promote maximum employment and stable prices for the American people. The economy has made considerable progress toward our dual mandate objectives. Inflation has eased substantially over the past year, while the labor market has remained strong. And that’s very good news. But inflation is still too high, further progress in bringing it down is not assured, and the path forward is uncertain. We are fully committed to returning inflation to our 2 percent goal. Restoring price stability is essential to achieve a sustainably strong labor market that benefits all. Today, the FOMC decided to leave our policy interest rate unchanged and to continue to reduce our securities holdings, though at a slower pace. Our restrictive stance of monetary policy has been putting downward pressure on economic activity and inflation, and the risks to achieving our employment and inflation goals have moved toward better balance over the past year. However, in recent months, inflation has shown a lack of further progress toward our 2 percent objective, and we remain highly attentive to inflation risks. I’ll have more to say about monetary policy after briefly reviewing economic developments. Recent indicators suggest that economic activity has continued to expand at a solid pace. Although GDP growth moderated from 3.4 percent in the fourth quarter of last year to 1.6 percent in the first quarter, private domestic final purchases—which excludes inventory investment, government spending and net exports, and usually sends a clearer signal on underlying demand—was 3.1 percent in the first quarter, as strong as the second half of 2023. Consumer spending has been robust over the past several quarters, even as high interest rates have weighed on housing and equipment investment. Improving supply conditions have supported resilient demand and the strong performance of the U.S. economy over the past year. The labor market remains relatively tight, but supply and demand conditions have come into better balance. Payroll job gains averaged 276,000 jobs per month in the first quarter, while the unemployment rate remains low at 3.8 percent. Strong job creation over the past year has been accompanied by an increase in the supply of workers, reflecting increases in participation among individuals aged 25 to 54 years and a continued strong pace of immigration. Nominal wage growth has eased over the past year and the jobs to workers gap has narrowed, but labor demand still exceeds the supply of available workers. Inflation has eased notably over the past year but remains above our longer run goal of 2 percent. Total PCE prices rose 2.7 percent over the 12 months ending in March  excluding the volatile food and energy categories, core PCE prices rose 2.8 percent. The inflation data received so far this year have been higher than expected. Although some measures of short term inflation expectations have increased in recent months, longer term inflation expectations appear to remain well anchored, as reflected in a broad range of surveys of households, businesses, and forecasters, as well as measures from financial markets. The Fed’s monetary policy actions are guided by our mandate to promote maximum employment and stable prices for the American people. My colleagues and I are acutely aware that high inflation imposes significant hardship, as it erodes purchasing power, especially for those least able to meet the higher costs of essentials like food, housing, and transportation. We are strongly committed to returning inflation to our 2 percent objective. The Committee decided at today’s meeting to maintain the target range for the federal funds rate at 5¼ to 5½ percent and to continue the process of significantly reducing our securities holdings, though at a slower pace. Over the past year, as labor market tightness has eased and inflation has declined, the risks to achieving our employment and inflation goals have moved toward better balance. The economic outlook is uncertain, however, and we remain highly attentive to inflation risks. We’ve stated that we do not expect that it will be appropriate to reduce the target range for the federal funds rate until we have gained greater confidence that inflation is moving sustainably toward 2 percent. So far this year, the data have not given us that greater confidence. In particular, and as I noted earlier, readings on inflation have come in above expectations. It is likely that gaining such greater confidence will take longer than previously expected. We are prepared to maintain the current target range for the federal funds rate for as long as appropriate. We’re also prepared to respond to an unexpected weakening in the labor market. We know that reducing policy restraint too soon or too much could result in a reversal of the progress we’ve seen on inflation. At the same time, reducing policy restraint too late or too little could unduly weaken economic activity and employment. In considering any adjustments to the target range for the federal funds rate, the Committee will carefully assess incoming data, the evolving outlook, and the balance of risks. Policy is well positioned to deal with the risks and uncertainties that we face in pursuing both sides of our dual mandate. We will continue to make decisions meeting by meeting. Turning to our balance sheet: The Committee decided at today’s meeting to slow the pace of decline in our securities holdings, consistent with the plans we released previously. Specifically, the cap on Treasury redemptions will be lowered from the current $60 billion per month to $25 billion per month as of June 1. Consistent with the Committee’s intention to hold primarily Treasury securities in the longer run, we’re leaving the cap on agency securities unchanged per month, and we will reinvest any proceeds in excess of this cap in Treasury securities. With principal payments on agency securities currently running at about $15 billion per month, total portfolio runoff will amount to roughly $40 billion per month. The decision to slow the pace of runoff does not mean that our balance sheet will ultimately shrink by less than it would otherwise but rather allows us to approach its ultimate level more gradually. In particular, slowing the pace of runoff will help ensure a smooth transition, reducing the possibility that money markets experience stress and thereby facilitating the ongoing decline in our securities holdings that are consistent with reaching the appropriate level of ample reserves. We remain committed to bringing inflation back down to our 2 percent goal and to keeping longer term inflation expectations well anchored. Restoring price stability is essential to set the stage for achieving maximum employment and stable prices over the longer run. To conclude: We understand that our actions affect communities, families, and businesses across the country. Everything we do is in service to our public mission. We, at the Fed, will do everything we can to achieve our maximum employment and price stability goals. Thank you. I look forward to your questions. . So I do think the evidence shows, you know, pretty clearly that policy is restrictive and is weighing on demand, and there are a few places I would point to for that. You can start with the labor market. So demand is still strong—the demand side of the labor market, in particular—but it’s cooled from its extremely high level of a couple years ago, and you see that in job openings. You saw it—more evidence of that today in the JOLTS report, as you’ll know. It’s still higher than pre pandemic. But it has been coming down both in the Indeed report and the JOLTS report. That’s, that’s demand cooling. The same is true of quits and hiring rates, which have essentially normalized. I also look at the—we look at surveys of workers and—pardon me—surveys of workers and businesses, and [they] ask workers, “Are jobs plentiful?” and ask businesses, “Are workers plentiful? Is it easy to find workers?” And you’ve seen that the answers to those have come back down to pre pandemic levels. You also see in interest sensitive spending, like housing and investment—you also see that higher interest rates are weighing on those activities. So I do think it’s clear that, that policy is restrictive. . So I would say that we believe it is restrictive, and we believe [that] over time it will be sufficiently restrictive. That will be a question that, that the data will have to answer. . Expectations are not anchored? . Are anchored. . You know, I don’t want to get into complicated hypotheticals. But I would say that, you know, we’re committed to retaining our current restrictive stance of policy for as long as is appropriate. And we’ll do that. . So I think it’s unlikely that the next policy rate move will be a hike. I’d say it’s unlikely. You know, our policy focus is really what I just mentioned, which is— which is how long to keep policy restrictive. You ask, what would it take? You know, I think we’d need to see persuasive evidence that our policy stance is not sufficiently restrictive to bring inflation sustainably down to 2 percent over time. That’s not—that’s not what we think we’re seeing, as I—as I mentioned, but that’s—something like that is what it would take. We’d look at the totality of the data in answer to that question. That would include inflation, inflation expectations, and all the other data too. . Well, I think, again, the test—what I’m saying is, if we were to come to that conclusion that policy weren’t tight enough to achieve that, so it would be the totality of all the things we’d be looking at. It could be expectations. It could be a combination of things. But, if we—if we reach that conclusion—and we don’t see evidence supporting that conclusion—that’s what it would take I think for us to take that step. . So, on—let me address cuts. So, obviously, our decisions that we make on our policy rate are going to depend on the incoming data, how the outlook is evolving, and the balance of risks, as always. And we’ll look at the totality of the data. So I think, and we think, that policy is well positioned to address different paths that the economy might take. And we’ve said that we don’t think it would be appropriate to dial back our restrictive policy stance until we’ve gained greater confidence that inflation is moving down sustainably toward 2 percent. So, for example, let me take a path: If we did have a path where inflation proves more persistent than expected and where the labor market remains strong, but inflation is moving sideways and we’re not gaining greater confidence, well, that would be a case in which it could be appropriate to hold off on rate cuts. I think there’s also other paths that the economy could take, which, which would cause us to want to consider rate cuts. And those would be—two of those paths would be that we do gain greater confidence, as we’ve said, that inflation is moving sustainably down to 2 percent, and another path could be, you know, an unexpected weakening in the labor market, for example. So those are paths in which you could see us cutting rates. So I think it really will depend on the data. In terms of peak rate, you know, I think, really, it’s the same question. I, I think the data will have to answer that question for us. . Again, it’s, it’s—we’ve set ourselves a test that we—for us to begin to reduce policy restriction, we’d want to be confident that inflation is moving—you know, moving sustainably down to 2 percent, and, for sure, one of the things we’d be looking at is the performance of inflation. We’d also be looking at inflation expectations. We’d be looking at the whole story. But clearly, incoming, incoming inflation data would be at the very heart of that decision. . So I think it’s hard to know that. I think we’ll be able to look back, you know, from down the road and look back and understand it better. You know, if you look at—let’s look at growth. Really, what we’ve seen so far this year in the first quarter is growth coming in about consistent with where it was last year. I know GDP came in lower, but you don’t see an acceleration in growth. I mean, the thought would be that financial conditions loosened in, in, December, and that caused an uptick in activity, and that caused inflation. Presumably, that’s what we’re tightening in the labor market. You don’t really see that happening. What you see is economic activity at a level that’s roughly the same as, as last year. So, you know, what’s causing this inflation? You know, we’ll, we’ll have a better sense of that over time. I don’t know that there’s an obvious connection there, though, with easing of financial conditions. In terms of tightening, you’re, you’re right. Rates are certainly higher now and have been for some time than they were before the December meeting. And they’re higher, and that’s tighter financial conditions. And, you know, that’s appropriate, given what inflation has done in the first quarter. . So I just want to be careful that we don’t target wage growth or the labor market. And remember what we saw last year: very strong growth, a really tight labor market, and a historically fast decline in inflation. So—and that’s because we know there are two forces at work here. There’s the unwinding of the pandemic related supply side distortions and demand side distortions, and there’s also monetary policy, you know, restrictive monetary policy. So I wouldn’t rule out that something like that can continue. You know, I wouldn’t give up, at this point, on further things happening on the supply side either because, you know, we do see that companies still report that there are supply side issues that they’re facing. And also, even when the supply side issues are solved, it should take some time for that to affect economic activity and ultimately inflation. So there are still those things. So I don’t like to say that either strong—either growth or, or a strong labor market, in and of itself, would automatically create problems on inflation, because, of course, it didn’t do that last year. You ask about wages. We also don’t—we don’t target wages. We target price inflation. It is one of the inputs. The point with wages is, of course, we, like everyone else, like to see high wages, but we also want to see them not eaten up by high inflation. And that’s really what we’re trying to do, is to cool the economy and work with what’s happening on the supply side to bring—to bring the economy back to 2 percent inflation. Part of that will probably be having wage increases move down incrementally toward levels that are more sustainable. . Yeah. I’m not really thinking of it that way. You know, the—what we said is that we need to be more confident, and we’ve said—my colleagues and I today said that we didn’t see progress in the first—in the first quarter. And I’ve said that it appears, then, that it’s going to take longer for us to reach that point of confidence. So I don’t know how long it’ll take. You know, I can just say that when we get that confidence, then rate cuts will be in scope. And I don’t know exactly when that will be. . I—you know, not really. You know, what, what—so I thought it was appropriate to reserve judgment until, until we had the full quarter’s data, until we saw the March data. And so take a step back. What do we now see in the first quarter? We see strong economic activity, we see a strong labor market, and we see inflation. We see three inflation readings, and so I think you’re at a point there where you should take some signal. We don’t like to react to one or two months’ data, but this is a full quarter. And I think it’s appropriate to take signal now, and we are taking signal. And the signal that we’re taking is that it’s likely to take longer for us to gain confidence that we are on a sustainable path down to 2 percent inflation. That’s the signal that we’re taking now. Yeah. . Yeah. So we will—you know, we will put the thing—we have put the thing under a microscope. I will say, nothing is going to come out of that that’s going to change the view. I think that, in fact, we didn’t gain confidence and that it’s going to take longer to get that confidence—but—confidence. I just think—you know the story. What’s happened since December is you’ve seen higher goods inflation than expected, and you’ve seen higher nonhousing services inflation than expected. And those two are working together to, to sort of be higher than we had thought. And there are stories behind how that happened, and, you know, we—I think—I think my expectation is that we will, over the course of this year, see inflation move back down. That’s, that’s my forecast. I think my confidence in that is lower than it was because of the data that we’ve seen. So, you know, we’re looking at those things. We also continue to expect, and I continue to expect, that housing services inflation, given where market rents are, those will show up in measured housing services inflation over time. We believe that it will. It just—it looks like the lag—that there are substantial lags between when, you know, lower market rates turned up and—for new tenants and when it shows up for existing tenants or for in housing services. . I wouldn’t say that. No. I mean, the active tool of monetary policy is, of course, the interest rates. And this is—this is a long—a plan we’ve long had in place to slow, really not in order to, you know, provide accommodation to the economy but to—or to be less restrictive to the economy. It really is to ensure that the process of shrinking the balance sheet down to where we want to get it is a smooth one and doesn’t wind up in—with financial market turmoil the way it did the last—the last time we did this and the only other time we’ve ever done this. . So, on your first question, I don’t have a probability estimate for you. But all I can say is that, you know, we’ve said that we didn’t think it would be appropriate to cut until we were more confident that inflation was moving sustainably down to 2 percent. We didn’t get our confidence, in that [it] didn’t increase in the first quarter. And, in fact, what really happened was we came to the view that it will take longer to get that confidence. And I think there are—you know, I think it’s—the economy has been very hard for forecasters broadly to predict—to predict its path. But there are paths to, to not cutting, and there are paths to cutting. It’s really going to depend on the data. In terms of the employment mandate, to your point, if you go back a couple of years, our, our sort of framework document says that, when you look at the two mandate goals, and if one of them is further away from goal than the other, then you focus on that one. It actually—it’s the time to get back there times the, you know, times how far it is from the goal. And that was clearly inflation. So our focus was very much on inflation. As—and this is what we referred to in the statement. As inflation has come down, now to below 3 percent on a—on a 12 month basis, it’s become—we’re now focusing [on] the other goal. The employment goal now comes back into focus. And so we are focusing on it. And, and that’s how we think about that. . Yeah. I’m not dealing really in likelihoods. I think there are—there are paths that the economy can take that would involve cuts and there are paths that wouldn’t. And I don’t have great confidence in which of those paths—I think I would say my personal forecast is that we will begin to see further progress on inflation this year. I don’t know that it will be enough, sufficient. I don’t know that it won’t. I think we’re going to have to let the data lead us on that. In terms of your question—your second question was stagflation. I guess I would say I was around for stagflation, and it was, you know, 10 percent—10 percent unemployment. It was high single digits inflation. Right now we have—and very slow growth—so right now we have 3 percent growth, which is, you know, pretty solid growth I would say, by any measure, and we have inflation running under 3 percent. So I don’t—I don’t really understand where that’s coming from. And, in addition, I would say most forecasters, including our forecasting, was that last year’s level of growth was very high—3.4 percent in, I guess, the fourth quarter, you know— and probably not going to be sustained and would come down. But that would be—that would be our forecast. That wouldn’t be stagflation. That would still be to a very healthy level of growth. And, of course, with inflation, you know, our—we will return inflation to 2 percent, and that won’t be—so I don’t see the “stag” or the “flation,” actually. [Laughter] . So I think I would take that question this way: We saw a year of very high productivity growth in 2023, and we saw a year of, I think, negative productivity growth in 2022. So I think it’s hard to draw from the data. I mean, the question is, will productivity run—there are two questions. One is: Will productivity run persistently above its longer run trend? I don’t think we know that. In terms of potential output, though, that’s a separate question. We’ve had a—what amounts to a, a significant increase in the potential output of the economy that’s not about productivity. It was about having more labor, frankly, both through—in 2022, both through participation and also through immigration. So we’re very much—like other forecasters and economists—getting our arms around what that means for potential output this year and next year—and last year for that matter, too. So I think—in that case, I think you really do have a significant increase in potential output, but you’ve also got—so you’ve got more supply. But those people also come in, they work, they have jobs, they spend. So you’ve also got demand. So it—there may be—it may be that you get more supply than you get demand at the beginning, but, ultimately, it should be neither inflationary nor disinflationary over, over a longer period. . No. I think we, we believe our policy stance is in a good place and is appropriate to the current situation. We believe it’s restrictive, and, you know, we—our evidence for that, I went over earlier. You see it in the labor market. You see it in inflation sensitive spending, where demand has clearly come down a lot over the past few years. And that’s, that’s more from monetary policy, whereas the supply side of things that are happening are more on the supply side. So that’s how I would think about it. . Well, of course we’re not satisfied with 3 percent inflation. “Three percent” can’t be in a sentence with “satisfied.” [Laughter] So we will return inflation to 2 percent over time but over time. And we think our policy stance is, is appropriate to do that. So if we were to conclude that policy is not sufficiently restrictive to bring inflation sustainably down to 2 percent, then that would be what it would take for us to want to increase rates. We don’t see that. We don’t see evidence for that. So that’s where we are. . So the policy focus has been on—has really been on what to do about, about holding the current—the current level of restriction. That’s really—that’s part of the policy. That’s where the policy discussion was in the meeting. . There isn’t any rule. You can’t look to a rule. You know, these are— these are going to be judgment calls. You know, clearly restrictive monetary policy needs more time to do its job. That, that is pretty clear, based on what we’re seeing. How long that will take and how patient we should be is going to depend on the totality of the data, how the outlook evolves. . So we’re, we’re always going to do what we think the right thing for the economy is when we come to that consensus view that it’s the right thing to do for the economy. That’s our record. That’s what we do. We’re not looking at anything else. You know, it’s hard enough to get the economics right here. These are difficult things, and if, if we were to take on a whole, another, set of factors and use that as a new filter, it would reduce the likelihood we’d actually get the economics right. So that’s how we think about it around here. And, you know, we’re at peace over it. We know that we’ll do what we think is the right thing, when we think it’s the right thing. And we’ll all do that. And that’s, that’s how everybody around here thinks. So I can’t say it enough, that we just don’t—we just don’t go down that road. If you go down that road, where do you stop? And, and so we’re not on that road. We’re on the road where we’re serving all the American people and making our decisions based on the data and how those data affect the outlook and the balance of risks. . There’s— . —a significant difference between an institution that takes into account all sorts of political events and one that doesn’t. That’s where the significant difference is, and, you know, we’re—we just don’t do that. I mean, you can go back and read the transcripts for every—this is my fourth election, fourth presidential election here. Read all the transcripts, and see if anybody mentions, in any way, the pending election. It just isn’t part of our thinking. It’s not what we’re hired to do. If we start down that road, again, I don’t know how you stop. So. . So I think if you go back to where wages peaked—wage increases peaked a couple, three years ago—essentially all wage measures have come down substantially [when compared] to that. But they are not, not down to where they were before the pandemic. They’re still roughly a percentage point higher. And we’ve seen pretty consistent progress but not uniformly. And you’ll note the ECI reading from Tuesday was—it was expected to be—to have come down, and, essentially, it was flat year over year, you know, I think roughly. So yeah, I mean, it’s—that part of it is bumpy. And, again, we don’t target wage increases, but, you know, in the longer run, if you have—if you have wage increases running higher than productivity would warrant, then, you know, there will be inflationary pressures. Employers will raise prices over time if that’s the case. So we’ve seen progress. It has been inconsistent, but we have seen a substantial decline overall. But we have a ways to go on that. . Well, the thing that hurts everybody, and particularly people in the lower income brackets, is inflation. If you’re a person who’s living paycheck to paycheck, and suddenly all the things you buy—the fundamentals of life—go up in price, you, you are in trouble right away. And so, with those people in mind, in particular, what we’re doing is, we’re using our tools to bring down inflation. It will take some time, but we will succeed. And we will bring inflation back down to 2 percent, and then people won’t have to worry about it again. That’s what we’re doing, and we know that it’s painful and inconvenient. But the dividends will be paid and will be very large. And, and everyone will share in those dividends, and we’ve made quite a lot of progress if you can think about it. I think core—I think headline—core PCE [inflation] peaked at 5.8 [percent]. Now it’s at—anyway, headline peaked at 7.1. Now it’s at 2.7. Don’t want to get that wrong. . Yes. I mean, I think—I think that restrictive monetary policy is doing what it’s supposed to do, and it’s—but it’s also, in this case unusually, working alongside and with the healing of the supply side. This, this—what was different this time was that a big part of the source of the inflation and the reason why we’re having this conversation is that we had this supply side kind of collapse, with shortages and bottlenecks and all that kind of thing. And so—and this was to do with the shutting down and reopening of the economy and other things that, that really raised demand. So, many factors did that. So I think now you see those two things working together, the reversal of those supply and demand distortions from the pandemic and the response to it, along with restrictive monetary policy. Those two things are working to bring down inflation, and we’ve made a lot of progress. Let’s remember how far we’ve come. And we have a ways to go. We’ve got work left to do, but we’re not looking at the very high inflation rates that we were seeing two years ago. . So, essentially, there are—there are a number of places in the economy where there are just lag structures built into the inflation process, and housing is one of them. So when you have—when, when someone goes to—a new person goes to rent an apartment, that’s called market rent, and you can see market rents are barely going up at all. The inflation in those has been very low. But it takes—before that, they were incredibly high. They sort of led the, the high part. So what happens is, those market rents take years, actually, to get all the way into rents for tenants who are rolling over their leases. Landlords don’t tend to charge as much of an increase to a rollover tenant, for whatever reason. And what that does is it builds up a sort of an unrealized portion of increases when there have been big increases. And what happens is, you know—it’s complicated, but the story is it just takes some time for that to get in. Now I am confident that, as long as market rents remain low, this is going to show up in measured inflation, assuming that market rents do remain low. How—what will be the exact timing of it? I think we’ve learned that the lags are longer. We now think significantly longer than we thought at the beginning, and so confident that it will come but not so confident in the timing of it. But, yes, I expect that, that this will happen. . So that—you’re right. I think that, that may happen, and, you know that we all serve domestic mandates, right? So I think the difference between the United States and other countries that are now considering rate cuts is that they’re just not having the kind of growth we’re having. They have—their inflation is performing about like ours or maybe a little better, but they’re not experiencing the kind of growth we’re experiencing. So we actually have the luxury of having strong growth and a strong labor market, very low unemployment, high job creation, and all of that, and we can be patient. And we will—we’ll be careful and cautious as we approach the decision to cut rates, whereas I think other jurisdictions may go before that. In terms of the implications, you know, I think obviously markets see it coming. It’s priced in now. And so I think the markets and economies can adapt to it. And I think, you know, we haven’t seen—in addition, for the emerging market economies, we haven’t seen the kind of turmoil that was more frequent 20 years ago, 30 years ago. And that’s, I think, partly because emerging market countries, many of them have much better monetary policy frameworks, much more credibility on inflation. And so they’re navigating this pretty well this time. . So you’re right. I think we thought, and most people thought, there would have to be probably significant dislocations somewhere in the economy, perhaps the labor market, to get inflation all the way down from the very high levels it was at at the beginning of this episode. That didn’t happen. That’s a tremendous result. We’re very, of course, gratified and pleased that that hasn’t happened. And, if you look at the dynamics that enabled that, it really was that this, the—that so much of the gain was from the unwinding of things that weren’t to do with monetary policy but the unwinding of the distortions to the economy, you know, supply problems—supply side problems and also some, some demand issues as well. The unwinding of those really helped inflation come down. Now, as I’ve said, I’m not giving up on that. So I think—I think it is possible that, that those forces will still work to help us bring inflation down. We can’t—we can’t be guaranteed that that’s true, though. And so we’re—you know, we’re trying to use our tools in a way that keeps the labor market strong, and the economy strong, but also helps bring inflation back down to 2 percent sustainably. We will bring inflation down to 2 percent sustainably. We hope we can do it without, you know, without significant dislocations in the labor market or elsewhere. . You know, I said “an unexpected weakening” is what I—the way I characterized it. So, you know—and I’m not going to try to define exactly what I mean by that. But, you know, it would be—it would have to be meaningful and get our attention and lead us to think that the labor market was really significantly weakening for us to want to react to it. A couple of tenths in the unemployment rate would be—would probably not do that. But a broader—it would be a broader thing that would—that would suggest that it would be appropriate to consider cutting. I think whether you decide to cut will depend on all the facts and circumstances, not just that one. . So let me—let me start by saying that the Fed is committed to, you know, completing this process and carrying out Basel III Endgame in a way that’s faithful to Basel and also comparable to what the other large comparable jurisdictions are doing. We haven’t made any decisions on, on policy or on process at all. Nothing. Nothing. No decisions have been made. I’ll say again, though, if we conclude that re proposal is appropriate, we won’t hesitate to insist on that. . You know, there’s no mechanical rule in place there. But I would say that the, you know, the Basel III process is by far the most important thing and really is, I think, occupying us at this time in terms of what’s, what’s—what we’re moving ahead with. . So I think if you listen to, and you all do, listen to my 18 colleagues on the FOMC, you’ll see that we do not lack for a diversity of voices and perspectives. We really don’t. And it’s one of the great aspects of the Federal Reserve System. We have 12 Reserve Banks around the country where they have their own economic staff, not the people who work here at the Board. There are different people. You know, and so each, each Reserve Bank has its own culture around monetary policy and its own approach and that kind of thing. It guarantees you a diversity of perspectives. So I think that the perspectives are very diverse. But—and, in terms of—in terms of dissents, you know, we have dissents. And, you know, a thoughtful dissent is a good thing, if someone really makes you think, that kind of thing. But all I can say from my standpoint is I try—I listen carefully to people. I try to incorporate their thinking or do everything I can to incorporate their thinking into what we’re doing. And I think many people, if they feel that’s happening, you know, that for most people most of the time, that’ll be enough. And—but I’m not—I mean, it’s, it’s not, you know, frowned upon or illegal or against the rules or anything like that. It just is the way things come out. And I mean, I think we have a very diverse group of rounded people—frankly, more diverse than it used to be in many dimensions, more diverse from the obvious gender and demographic ways, but also we have more people who are not Ph.D. economists. So we have people from business and law and academia and things like that. So I think we actually do have quite a good diverse perspective. I think all of us read these stories about the lack of diversity, and we look around the room and say, “I don’t understand. I really don’t understand what they’re talking about.” So—but I get the question, though. Thank you very much.

****FOMCpresconf20240612

. Good afternoon. My colleagues and I remain squarely focused on achieving our dual mandate goals of maximum employment and stable prices for the benefit of the American people. Our economy has made considerable progress toward both goals over the past two years. The labor market has come into better balance, with continued strong job gains and a low unemployment rate. Inflation has eased substantially from a peak of 7 percent to 2.7 percent but is still too high. We are strongly committed to returning inflation to our 2 percent goal in support of a strong economy that benefits everyone. Today, the FOMC decided to leave our policy interest rate unchanged and to continue to reduce our securities holdings. We are maintaining our restrictive stance of monetary policy in order to keep demand in line with supply and reduce inflationary pressures. I’ll have more to say about monetary policy after briefly reviewing economic developments. Recent indicators suggest that economic activity has continued to expand at a solid pace. Although GDP growth moderated from 3.4 percent in the fourth quarter of last year to 1.3 percent in the first quarter, private domestic final purchases—which excludes inventory investment, government spending, and net exports and usually sends a clearer signal on underlying demand—grew at 2.8 percent in the first quarter, nearly as strong as the second half of 2023. Growth of consumer spending has slowed from last year’s robust pace but remains solid. And investment in equipment and intangibles has picked up from its anemic pace last year. Improving supply conditions have supported resilient demand and the strong performance of the U.S. economy over the past year. In our Summary of Economic Projections, Committee participants generally expect GDP growth to slow from last year’s pace, with a median projection of 2.1 percent this year and 2.0 percent over the next two years. In the labor market, supply and demand conditions have come into better balance. Payroll job gains averaged 218,000 jobs per month in April and May, a pace that is still strong but a bit below that seen in the first quarter. The unemployment rate ticked up but remains low at 4 percent. Strong job creation over the past couple of years has been accompanied by an increase in the supply of workers, reflecting increases in participation among individuals aged 25 to 54 years and a continued strong pace of immigration. Nominal wage growth has eased over the past year, and the jobs to workers gap has narrowed. Overall, a broad set of indicators suggests that conditions in the labor market have returned to about where they stood on the eve of the pandemic—relatively tight but not overheated. FOMC participants expect labor market strength to continue. The median unemployment rate projection in the SEP is 4.0 percent at the end of this year and 4.2 percent at the end of next year. Inflation has eased notably over the past two years but remains above our longer run goal of 2 percent. Total PCE prices rose 2.7 percent over the 12 months ending in April  excluding the volatile food and energy categories, core PCE prices rose 2.8 percent. The consumer price index—which came out this morning and tends to run higher than the PCE, PCE price index— rose 3.3 percent over the 12 months ending in May, and the core CPI rose 3.4 percent. The inflation data received earlier this year were higher than expected, though more recent monthly readings have eased somewhat. Longer term inflation expectations appear to remain well anchored, as reflected in a broad range of surveys of households and businesses and forecasters, as well as measures from financial markets. The median projection in the SEP for total PCE inflation is 2.6 percent this year, 2.3 percent next year, and 2.0 percent in 2026. My colleagues and I are acutely aware that high inflation imposes significant hardship, as it erodes purchasing power, especially for those least able to meet the higher costs of essentials like food, housing, and transportation. Our monetary policy actions are guided by our dual mandate to promote maximum employment and stable prices for the American people. In support of these goals, the Committee decided at today’s meeting to maintain the target range for the federal funds rate at 5¼ to 5½ percent and to continue reducing our securities holdings. As labor market tightness has eased and inflation has declined over the past year, the risks to achieving our employment and inflation goals have moved toward better balance. The economic outlook is uncertain, however, and we remain highly attentive to inflation risks. We’ve stated that we do not expect it will be appropriate to reduce the target range for the federal funds rate until we have gained greater confidence that inflation is moving sustainably toward 2 percent. So far this year, the data have not given us that greater confidence. The most recent inflation readings have been more favorable than earlier in the year, however, and there has been modest further progress toward our inflation objective. We will need to see more good data to bolster our confidence that inflation is moving sustainably toward 2 percent. We know that reducing policy restraint too soon or too much could result in a reversal of the progress that we’ve seen on inflation. At the same time, reducing policy restraint too late or too little could unduly weaken economic activity and employment. In considering any adjustments to the target range for the federal funds rate, the Committee will carefully assess incoming data, the evolving outlook, and the balance of risks. In our SEP, FOMC participants wrote down their individual assessments of an appropriate path for the federal funds rate, based on what each participant judges to be the most likely scenario going forward. If the economy evolves as expected, the median participant projects that the appropriate level of the federal funds rate will be 5.1 percent at the end of this year, 4.1 percent at the end of 2025, and 3.1 percent at the end of 2026. But these projections are not a Committee plan or any kind of a decision. As the economy evolves, assessments of the appropriate policy, policy path will adjust in order to best promote our maximum employment and price stability goals. If the economy remains solid and inflation persists, we’re prepared to maintain the current target range for the federal funds rate as long as appropriate. If the labor market were to weaken unexpectedly or if inflation were to fall more quickly than anticipated, we’re prepared to respond. Policy is well positioned to deal with the risks and uncertainties that we face in pursuing both sides of our dual mandate. We’ll continue to make our decisions meeting by meeting, based on the totality of the data and its implications for the outlook and the balance of risks. The Fed has been assigned two goals for monetary policy—maximum employment and stable prices. We remain committed to bringing inflation back down to our 2 percent goal and to keeping longer term inflation expectations well anchored. Restoring price stability is essential to achieving maximum employment and stable prices over the long run. Our success in delivering on these goals matters to all Americans. We understand that our actions affect communities, families, and businesses across the country. Everything we do is in service to our public mission. We at the Fed will do everything we can to achieve our maximum employment and price stability goals. Thank you, and I look forward to your questions. . Yeah. So what’s going on there is that we had very low readings in the second half of last year—June through December, really. And we’re now lapping those. So as you go through the 12 month window, a very low reading drops out, and a new reading comes in. The new reading gets added to the 12 month window. So it’s just a, a slight element of conservativism that we’re, we’re assuming a certain level of—of, you know, incoming monthly PCE and core PCE numbers. We’re assuming, you know, good, but not great, numbers. And if you put that on top of where we are now, you get a very slight increase in the 12 month—in the 12 month, you know, reading. Now, do we have high confidence that that’s right? No. It’s just the kind of conservative way for forecasting things. If we were to get more readings like today’s reading, then, of course, that wouldn’t be the case. So it’s just a forecasting device. I think, I think—let me say that we welcome today’s reading and then hope for more like that. . Yeah—no. I mean, I think we’ve, we’ve—what we said is that we don’t think it’ll be appropriate to, to reduce rates and begin to loosen policy until we have more confidence that inflation is moving back down to 2 percent on a—on a sustainable basis. And that’s the—that’s the test we’ve applied. I don’t know that—I think if we—I don’t know that this rules that in or out. I mean, really, it’s, it’s a forecast—a fairly conservative forecast month by month that would lead to slightly higher, you know, 12 months rates by the end of the year. If we get, you know, good—better readings than that, then you will see that come down or, or remain the same. If you’re at 2.6, 2.7 [percent], you know, that’s, that’s a really good place to be. . So as far as the SEP part of that is concerned—as you know, I talk to—I talk to all of the other participants on the FOMC every cycle, and we talk about their Summary of Economic Projections and, and the dot plot—and, you know, their dot plot and everything. And what you—what I hear and see is that people are looking at, at, you know, a range of plausible outcomes. And in many cases, they’re—they’re thinking, “I don’t really”— you know, “I can’t really distinguish between two of these. They’re so close for me.” These are very close calls, but we ask them to write down the most likely one—so they do. And as, I think, you’ve, you’ve—as you’ve said, there’s 15 of the 19 are, are kind of clustered around one or two. So I think I would look at, at all—I’d look at all of them as plausible, but I’d look at—so I think that does tell you kind of what the Committee thinks. But what everyone agrees on is, it’s going to be data dependent. No one—no one brings to this or takes away from it that is on the Committee a really strong commitment to a particular rate path. It’s actually just their forecast and their—it’s a combination of their forecast and their own reaction function. But, again, everyone would say that this is very data dependent, and I don’t hold it with high confidence. And I think if you’re looking for—and, and don’t really think that they’re—they’re not trying to send a strong signal that “this is what I think is the right thing.” It’s just what they think at a given moment in time, subject to data. In terms of, you know, future meetings, we haven’t, you know—we don’t—we don’t try to—we don’t make decisions about future meetings until we get there. I think in terms of what we need to see, I mentioned it earlier—we, we want to—we want to gain further confidence. Certainly, more good inflation readings will help with that. I’m not going to be specific about how many because, you know, really, it’s going to be not just the inflation rating—readings—it’s going to be the totality of the data: what’s happening in the labor market, what’s happening with the balance of risks, what’s happening with the forecast, what’s happening with growth. You look at all of that, and you ask, “Are we confident? Have we reached an appropriate level of confidence that inflation is moving down sustainably to 2 percent, or, alternatively, do we see really unexpected signs of weakness in the labor market that would call for a response?”—which is—which is another thing that could, could happen. But, again, we don’t see that. And I—we do see today’s—we see today’s report as, as progress and as, you know, building confidence. But we, we don’t see ourselves as having the confidence that would warrant—you know, that would warrant beginning to, to loosen policy at this time. . So we—this happens too often, but it, it does happen. It just is, you know—data came—I think it happened a couple of meetings ago—a few meetings ago. So when that happens—when there’s an important data print during the meeting, first day or second day— what we do is, we, we make sure people remember that they have the ability to update. We tell them how to do that. And, and some people do  some people don’t. Most, most people don’t. But I’m not going to get into the specifics, but you have the ability to do that. So that, you know—what’s in the SEP actually does reflect the data that we got today to the extent you can, you know, reflect it in one day. I think we’ll, you know—you will see PPI tomorrow. We’ll know more about the PCE [inflation] reading as the month goes on. But the initial CPI reading and its, you know, kind of first level translation to, to PCE [inflation] we did have this morning. We were briefed about it, and people were able to consider whether they should make changes. And, as I said, you know, some people generally do, but most people generally don’t. . Sure. So by, by so many measures, the labor market was, was kind of overheated two years ago. And we’ve seen it gradually move back into much better balance between supply and demand. So, what have we seen? We’ve seen labor force supply come up quite a bit through immigration and through recovering participation. That’s ongoing, mostly now through the immigration channel. But still, we’ve had some increases in prime age labor force. In terms of on the demand side, you know, we’ve seen—well, we’ve seen quits moving down. We’ve seen job openings moving down. We’ve seen wage increases moving from very, very high levels a couple of years ago back down to more sustainable levels. We have seen unemployment creep up now sixth tenths over the course of, of a year or so very, very gradually. So you put all that together—what you have is still low unemployment, still 4 percent unemployment—historically low. But it’s moved up a little bit—it’s softened a bit—and, and, you know, that’s an important statistic. But, but more than that, you’ve got strong job creation. You, you have payroll jobs still coming in strong, even though, you know, there’s an argument that they may be a bit overstated but still they’re, they’re still—they’re strong. So that’s what we see. We, we watch the labor market, of course, and the economy as a whole—but the labor market very carefully—and that’s what we see. We see gradual cooling—gradual moving toward better balance. We’re monitoring it carefully for signs of, of something more than that, but we really don’t see that. . So sometimes it’s—you can’t reconcile the differences. You just have to, have to—have to look at it and, and try to understand. And that’s why it always makes sense to look at a series, you know, in 6—in 3, 6, and 12 months of things rather than just one report. But you’re right to point to the last report, where it was your—job losses in the household survey—job gains, big job gains in the establishment survey. So, I mean, we’re left with ambiguous results, and we have to deal with that uncertainty around data. Nonetheless, the overall picture is one of a strong and gradually cooling—gradually rebalancing labor market. Job openings, while they’ve come way down, are still, you know, greater than the number of unemployed people. The jobs–workers gap is still a significantly positive number—greater than it was before the pandemic. So, overall, we’re looking at what is still a very strong labor market but not the superheated labor market of two years ago or even one year ago. . Yeah. The big thing that changed was the inflation forecast. So the inflation forecast moved up several tenths for the end of the year. And, and, as I mentioned earlier, in the, you know—what, what did we take away from this? We had really, really good inflation data in the second half of last year, then kind of a pause in progress in the first quarter. And what we took away from that was that it’s probably going to take longer to get the confidence that we need to begin to loosen policy. So the sense of that is that rate cuts that might take place in—might’ve taken place this year—take place next year, you know? We, we—there are—there are fewer rate cuts in the median this year, but there’s one more next year. So, so you really—if you look at year end 2025 and ’26, you’re, you’re almost exactly where you would have been, just it—just it’s moved later because of that progress. Now, you get another—you get data—different data today. So we’ll have to see where the data light the way. You know, we’re, we’re—the economy has, you know, repeatedly surprised forecasters in both directions, and today was certainly a better inflation report than almost anybody expected. And we’ll just have to see what, what—what the incoming data flow brings and, and how that affects the outlook and the balance of risks. . So two things about that—one, one is this—you’re right, it did move up. But, but I want to remember to point out that the long run neutral rate of interest is, is a long run concept. It, it really is a theoretical concept—can’t be directly observed. And what it is is the, the interest rate that would hold the economy at equilibrium—maximum employment and price stability—potentially, potentially years in the future where there are no shocks. So it’s— it’s a little bit—it’s not something we observe today. Today we’ve got a very specific economy with all kinds of shocks we’re still getting over from the pandemic. So it’s—I, I don’t think that the, the concept of r star—it’s a very important concept in economics and in what we do. But, honestly, it doesn’t really get you where you need to be to think about what appropriate policy is in the near term. But I, I—back to your original question, people have been gradually writing it up because I just think people are coming to the view that rates aren’t—are less likely to go down to their, their pre pandemic levels, which were, you know, very low by recent history measures. Now, we, we can’t really know that. That’s, that’s an interesting dispute and discussion to have now, but, ultimately, we think that things like the neutral rate are driven by longer run, slow moving forces. And, you know, there’s a really good question about whether, whether those really have changed or whether, instead, rates and the economy are experiencing a, a series of persistent but, ultimately, temporary shocks. That’s been the debate, and we can’t know. But in the meantime, we’re making policy with the economy that we have—with the distortions that we have. And I, I also—to your other point, I, I think it is—it is the case that as time has gone by, the question of “How restrictive is policy?” has become one that everyone’s asking, and we’re asking it, too. And, you know, my answer has been that policy is restrictive. The question of whether it’s sufficiently restrictive is going to be one we, we know over time. But I think for the reasons I’ve talked about at the last press conference and, and other places, I think the evidence is pretty clear that policy is restrictive and is having, you know, the effects that we would hope for. . I’d be reluctant to try to draw that conclusion. I, I think this is about, you know, looking at the incoming data and asking, “How much progress are we making on inflation, and how is the rest of the economy doing? Is the labor market still strong?” That’s what we’re thinking about. You know, you can—you can translate it into the—into the language you’re talking about, but, to me, the focus is more on, we have a goal, which is price stability, and another goal, which is maximum employment. How are we doing there? We think we’ve got a good, strong labor market still. We think we’ve been making progress toward the price  stability goal. And then for a while, there was a pause. And we look at today’s thing, and we think, “Well, that’s a good reading, and we hope we get more like that.” And, you know, in the meantime, we’re asking, “Is our policy stance about right?” And I think we think, “Yes, it’s about right.” We’re prepared to adjust that as appropriate, but we think—we think we’re getting the things that we would want to get, broadly speaking. And that’s why we’ve been at this policy rate now for almost a year. . Well, you know, it’s been coming—where’s it been coming from— let’s start with that. You know, clearly a lot of what—some of what we’ve been getting is just the reversal of the—the unwinding of the pandemic related distortions to both supply and demand. And that is, you know—that is complemented by and amplified—supported by restrictive monetary policy. So those two things have been working together. We’ve also had a very positive supply shock on the labor side. And, and, also, you get—you get a positive supply shock when the—when the supply conditions unwind and return to normal. So you’ve had, you know, above trend potential growth and, and high growth. And yet you’ve had the benefit of, of inflation coming down, you know, really fast, actually, last year, and you will see what the rest of this year brinks—brings. So these dynamics can continue as long as they continue. I mean, ultimately, the question is, ultimately, are you down to demand? And, and we don’t know that, though. I mean, look at today’s report. You know, if we see more like that—you know, we don’t—we can’t know what the future holds. But in the meantime, we’ve made pretty good progress on inflation with our current stance. . Well, we think—we think policy is restrictive. And we think, ultimately, that if you—if you just set policy at a restrictive level, eventually you will see real weakening in the economy. So that’s always been the thought is that, you know, since we raise rates this far, we’ve, we’ve always been pointing to cuts at a certain point. Not to eliminate the possibility of hikes, but, you know, no one has that as their base case, so—no one on the Committee does. But so that’s, that’s—you know, that’s how we think about it. And that’s what we’ve been getting. That’s what we’ve been getting is good progress on inflation, with growth at a—at a, a good level and with a strong labor market. Now, ultimately, we think rates will have to come down to continue to support that. But, so far, they haven’t had to. And, you know, that’s why we’re watching so carefully for signs of weakness. We don’t really see that. We kind of see what we wanted to see, which was gradual cooling in demand—gradual rebalancing in the labor market while we’re continuing to make progress on inflation. So we’re getting—we’re getting good results here. . On housing—you know, the housing situation is a complicated one. And you can see that’s a place where rates are really having, having a significant effect. I mean, ultimately, the best thing we can do for the housing market is to bring inflation down so that we can bring rates down so that the housing market can continue to normalize. There will still be a national housing shortage, as there was before the pandemic. There will still be one, but the distortions that we see now with lock ins and things like that—you know, low mortgages—in terms of banks, the banking system has been, you know, solid, strong, well capitalized. Lending—you know, we’ve seen good performance by the banks. We had the turmoil earlier last year, but, you know, banks have been focusing on bringing up their liquidity, bringing up their capital, and having a risk—risk management plans in place. So the banking system, you know, seems to be—seems to be in good shape. . So I, I think it’s true that housing—that inflationary pressures have come down. But we still have—we’re still getting high inflation readings. So, you know—and I think you can see it in, in various places in—you know, in some parts of, of nonhousing services. You see elevated inflation still—and that’s probably to do with—it could be to do with wages. Goods prices have kind of fluctuated. There’s been a surprising increase in, in import prices on goods, which is kind of hard to understand. And, you know, may, may—we’ve taken some signal from that, but, you know—and, and, of course, housing services. You’re seeing—you’re continuing to see high readings there to some extent. That’s, that’s, you know, catch up inflation from earlier pressures. But, I mean, overall, you’re right. Inflationary pressures have come down. As I mentioned, the labor market has come into better balance. Wages are still running, you know, I would say, above a, a sustainable path, which would be that of trend inflation and trend productivity. You’re still seeing wage increases moving above that. We, we haven’t thought of wages as being the principal, you know, cause of inflation. But at the same time, getting back to 2 percent inflation is likely to require a return to a more sustainable level, which is somewhat below the current level of increases in the aggregate. . I think if, you know—if you look back in 5 or 10 years and, and try to pull out the significance to the U.S. economy of one 25 basis point rate cut, you’d, you’d have quite a job on your hands. So that’s not how we look at it—you know, really, the whole rate path matters. And I, I do continue to think that when—you know, when we do start to loosen policy, that will show up in a significant loosening in financial market conditions. And the market will price in what it prices in. I don’t—I have no way of saying—we’re, we’re not at that stage, so I don’t know what we’ll be thinking about at that time. But it’s a consequential decision for the economy. And, you know, you want to—you want to get it right. And, fortunately, we have a strong economy, and we, we have the ability to, you know, approach this question carefully. And we will approach it carefully while we’re very much keeping an eye on, you know, downside economic risks, should they—should they emerge. . You know, we always want to avoid the tendency to dismiss the parts of inflation that we—that we don’t like and just make it go away. So—but we had a quarter where inflation was running higher, and, yes, I could stand here and say, “It’s stuff we shouldn’t have taken signal from.” But it is what it is. You know, you, you have to—you know, low inflation is low inflation. High—so if you have a quarter where it’s higher—we tried not to take signal from the first couple of months, but we got a third month, and we said, “Okay, the signal we’re taking is that, you know, we think it’s going to take longer to get confidence that inflation is moving sustainably down to 2 percent.” That’s, that’s what we said. I think that was the right thing to do. I still think that’s the right thing to do. Now we have today’s inflation reading, which is very different—very much more positive. We’re going to have to see what the trend is—what’s, what’s going to be the data going forward. We’re looking for something that gives us confidence that inflation is, is moving sustainably down to 2 percent. And readings like today’s, you know—that’s a step in the right direction. But, you know, one reading is—isn’t—it just—it’s only one reading. You don’t want to—you don’t want to be too motivated by any single data point. . I, you know—I, I don’t think anyone knows—has a definitive answer why people are, are not as happy about the economy as they might be. And we don’t tell people how they should think or feel about the economy. That’s not our job. We—you know, people experience what they experience. All I can tell you is what the—what the data show, which is, we’ve got an economy that’s growing at a solid pace. We’ve got a very strong labor market with unemployment at 4 percent. It’s been a long time since we’ve had, you know, a long stretch of time with unemployment at or below 4 percent—very long time. We had a period of high inflation. We—inflation has come down really significantly, and we’re doing everything we can to—you know, to bring that inflationary episode fully to a halt and fully restore price stability. We’re confident that we’ll get there. And in the meantime, you know, it’s going to be painful for, for people, but the ultimate pain would be a, a period of long, high—a long period of high inflation. It is people who—lower income people—people who are at the margins of the economy who, who have the worst experience—who experience the most pain from inflation. So, you know, it’s for those people—for all Americans, but particularly for those people—that we’re doing everything we can to bring inflation back down under control. . Well, you know, I, I don’t have a precise date for you. But what we said is that we, we want to make sure that we’re confident that inflation is actually moving back down to 2 percent. And when we are, then we can look at loosening policy. So having that kind of confidence that inflation will be at 2 percent just—it just pays benefits to the whole economy, to all Americans, for a long period of time. We had that period for a very long time. We very much want to get back to a place where people can, can not think about inflation—it’s just not a concern in the everyday economic decisions that they make. We were there for a long time, and our goal is to get back to that place. And we’ve made good progress, and we’re just—we’re in the phase now of just, you know, sticking with it until we get it done. . So, encouraging has been that growth—you know, the growth, clearly, that we had last year, particularly the second half of last year, and we continue to see still strong growth—solid growth this year. That’s been very encouraging. If you go back a year, there was a real concern about, you know, very much slowing growth and, and a recession—many forecasters had that. And that’s not what happened. Instead, we—the U.S. is, anyway, and it’s in—it’s in sharp distinction with many other advanced economies around the world. So that’s been encouraging. I would say that the, the—today’s inflation report is encouraging, but it comes after, you know, several reports that were not so encouraging. You asked about—your second question was really about shelter inflation. So I think if you go back a couple of years—we, we know that there were renters, and then there are, you know, people who own their houses. And we have OER, which is owners’ equivalent rent. And so when market based rents go up sharply, as they did at the beginning of the—of the—when the economy reopened, they really went up sharply. Those play into rollover rents much more slowly for existing tenants than they do for new tenants. And, and so what we—so we, we’ve found now that there are big lags. So there’s sort of a—there’s a bulge of high past increases in, in market rents. It has to get worked off, and that may take, you know, several years. Nonetheless, as long as market rents remain—are going at—up at relatively low levels—and they still are—you know, this, this is just going to happen. It just is going to happen more slowly than we thought. You know, we, we also do sort of this thing where we impute a rental value to, to owned homes. And that’s—you know, many countries around the world do that. Some do it differently than us. It’s something that the—you know, that the, the price experts have regularly looked at. It is not something that we’re the only country that does, and it’s not something we’re looking at changing or would look at changing, you know, anytime soon. But it—it’s true. It’s one of the very hardest things in, in inflation and in prices is how to think about, you know, the services that someone is getting by living in a home that they could rent, but they’re actually living in it. And some countries—you should just ignore that. But that’s not our—that’s not how we do inflation here. We, we do it the way we do it, and we’ve been very transparent about it. And, you know, it’s true that we’re—we’re seeing delays in, in realizing what—what’s happening economically. But we understand that—you know, we understand that very well. . So, you know, we monitor all the things you mentioned and more. You know, what we’re seeing is, basically, spending was going up faster than disposable income during big parts of next year, so—last year, rather—and so what that—you’d expect to see is people spending more on their credit cards. That—that has been happening. Credit card balances have been going up. Credit card defaults have been going up. They’re not at high levels. Remember that after the pandemic, people were cooped up. They couldn’t spend money. They couldn’t go out to spend money  they could spend money from home. But households were in very, very strong—historically strong—financial shape. They’ve now worked off a lot of that. So we’re, we’re watching that carefully. And, you know, what do we see? That’s what we see. We, we see the same data that everybody else sees, but you’ve still got a household sector that’s in—that’s in pretty good shape. You know—but, nonetheless, it’s not in the kind of shape it was in a year or two ago. And we’re, you know—we’re carefully watching that. . So consumer spending is still growing. It’s not growing at the pace it was growing at a year or so ago, but, but it’s still—it’s still growing solidly. And, by the way, other parts of the economy are picking up. Spending on equipment and intangibles is—has picked up quite a bit, you know, in the wake of all the construction that we saw of new tech— you know, tech plants. So, overall, the economy is exhibiting solid growth, and, you know— something around 2 percent—which is—which is, you know, good—a good pace of growth for the U.S. economy. But, no, you’re, you’re right, though. We, we do see the same thing other people see, which is, you know, increasing financial pressures on, you know, more lower income people. And, and, you know, the best thing we can do is, is to foster a very strong jobs economy, which we think we have done—ultimately to get inflation under control, because those people experience inflation, you know, very directly—very painfully. And, and, you know, once, once we get inflation under control, rates can come down—which, which will also improve things. . You know—you know, when I say “unexpectedly,” the first thing is more than, kind of, is in our forecast or in common forecasts—so, something more than that. But we’ll be looking at everything. You know, we’ll—the, the labor market, you know, has the ability—has, has the tendency sometimes to, to weaken quickly. So waiting for that to happen is, is not what we’re doing. You know, we’re watching very carefully  we’re looking at the balance of risks. I always point out the balance of risks, so—and, and also the fact that we look at, at all of it—the whole situation. So, you know, a decision to begin to—you know, to loosen policy could have several reasons associated with it at a given time. But I, you know, I would just— you know, we monitor all the—all the labor market data. And if we saw troubling—weakening more than—more than expected, then that would be something we’d consider responding to. But we’d look at the—we look at the broader context of what’s going on, too. . I’m not going to—yeah, I mean, I, I can think of things that would— many things would make it on that list, but I don’t think I’ll, I’ll utter them here. . You know, I, I don’t actually have that kind of mechanical thing in, in my thinking. I, I get that, you know—as many good ones as we had bad ones—but it’s not like that. It’s the whole. It’s going to be the totality of the data—[including] labor market data, the growth data. In terms of inflation, you know, you’d, you’d want to see real progress that builds your confidence that we’re—that we are on a path down to 2 percent. And I, I don’t want to try to give you specific numbers of things, because that points to dates, and I, I just don’t think—we’re not at a point of being able to do that. . So we don’t—actually, it’s our—it’s our finance ministry, the Treasury Department, that has a responsibility for thinking about and, and, if it sees fit, doing things about the level of the dollar. So for us, it’s just another financial variable. And you’re right—the dollar has been—has exhibited, exhibited some strength over the course of the last year or so because the U.S. economy is very strong. We don’t think of it as benefiting or hurting the U.S. We don’t—again, we don’t manage the level of the dollar. That’s, that’s not our— that’s not our job. It’s not. You know—and for, for our economy, what, you know, we’re trying to foster is maximum employment and price stability. And we feel like we’ve made good progress on, on both of those goals over the course of the past year. . You know—so we are—we’re well aware of the two sided risks here, let me just say. We, we understand that if we wait too long, that could come at the cost of economic activity, of employment, of the expansion. We understand that if we move too, too quickly, we could end up undoing a lot of the good that we’ve done and have to then start over, and it could be very disruptive. So we’re, we’re extremely aware of both of those risks and, and just basically trying to manage them. And what we said is that we’ll—that we’re—we don’t think it’ll be appropriate to, to begin to loosen policy until we’re more confident that inflation is moving down to 2 percent over time on a sustainable basis. That’s—that’s kind of been our test. Or there’s another test, which is, you know, an unexpected deterioration in labor market conditions. So I think that’s, that’s the right way for us to think about it. That’s our—that’s our dual mandate there. And, you know, we, we have a strong economy. We’ve got growth—all forecasts are very commonly around 2 percent. That’s a—that’s a strong growth rate for our economy. The labor market continues to print jobs at a pretty high rate. Unemployment is still low. So we have the ability now to approach this question carefully, and that’s, that’s what we’re doing. . Yeah, we, we completely understand that that’s the risk. And that’s, that’s not what we’re—that’s not our plan is to wait for things to break and then try to fix them. We’re, we’re trying to balance these two goals in a way that is consistent with our framework, and we think we’re doing that. . So we—what, what we’ve been thinking is that we would announce and commence the review later or late in the year. In the meantime, as that time approaches, we will be devoting a lot of careful thought and planning to the contours of it. Within scope would certainly be communications generally. I—I’m not going to say that we’ll look at this or that particular thing. And all the other details, you know—we’re just—we don’t want to get prematurely into a conversation until it’s really time to have it. And so, you know, I’m going to leave pretty much everything else to, to later in the year. . I wouldn’t—there isn’t any one thing—one variable, like housing prices moderating, that would really decide or decide against what we’re doing. We’ve got an overall test, which is greater confidence that inflation is moving down to 2 percent on a sustainable basis. That’s our overall test. Or, alternatively, we see unexpected weakening in the labor market. So those are—those are two different tests. I would say, you know, we’re not— we’re not looking at any one price in any one sector and saying, “That’s the one.” We don’t target housing prices, for example. And we don’t target wages. We, we target aggregate prices and overall employment, so— . I think you’d look at the over—we’d be looking at the aggregate numbers and, and asking ourselves, “What’s going on here with inflation in the—at the aggregate level?” And, you know—and, of course, if, if—any price that contributed to ongoing inflation would, would matter. Any price that contributed to ongoing disinflation would matter, too, but I wouldn’t single out housing as having a, a special role there. Thank you very much.

****FOMCpresconf20240731

. Good afternoon. My colleagues and I remain squarely focused on achieving our dual mandate goals of maximum employment and stable prices for the benefit of the American people. Our economy has made considerable progress toward both goals over the past two years. The labor market has come into better balance, and the unemployment rate remains low. Inflation has eased substantially from a peak of 7 percent to 2.5 percent. We are strongly committed to returning inflation to our 2 percent goal in support of a strong economy that benefits everyone. Today, the FOMC decided to leave our policy interest rate unchanged and to continue to reduce our securities holdings. We are maintaining our restrictive stance of monetary policy in order to keep demand in line with supply and reduce inflationary pressures. We are attentive to risks on both sides of our dual mandate, and I will have more to say about monetary policy after briefly reviewing economic developments. Recent indicators suggest that economic activity has continued to expand at a solid pace. GDP growth moderated to 2.1 percent in the first half of the year, down from 3.1 percent last year. Private domestic final purchases, or PDFP—which excludes inventory investment, government spending, and net exports and usually sends a clearer signal of underlying demand— grew at a 2.6 percent pace over that same period, the first half. Growth of consumer spending has slowed from last year’s robust pace but remains solid. Investment in equipment and intangibles has picked up from its anemic pace last year. In the housing sector, investment stalled in the second quarter after a strong rise in the first. Improving supply conditions have supported resilient demand and the strong performance of the U.S. economy over the past year. In the labor market, supply and demand conditions have come into better balance. Payroll job gains averaged 177,000 jobs per month in the second quarter—a solid pace, but below that seen in the first quarter. The unemployment rate has moved up but remains low at 4.1 percent. Strong job creation over the past couple of years has been accompanied by an increase in the supply of workers, reflecting increases in participation among individuals aged 25 to 54 years and a strong pace of immigration. Nominal wage growth has eased over the past year, and the jobs to workers gap has narrowed. Overall, a broad set of indicators suggests that conditions in the labor market have returned to about where they stood on the eve of the pandemic—strong, but not overheated. Inflation has eased notably over the past two years but remains somewhat above our longer run goal of 2 percent. Total PCE prices rose 2.5 percent over the 12 months ending in June  excluding the volatile food and energy categories, core PCE prices rose 2.6 percent. Longer term inflation expectations appear to remain well anchored, as reflected in a broad range of surveys of households and businesses and forecasters, as well as measures from financial markets. My colleagues and I are acutely aware that high inflation imposes significant hardship, as it erodes purchasing power, especially for those least able to meet the higher costs of essentials like food, housing, and transportation. Our monetary policy actions are guided by our dual mandate to promote maximum employment and stable prices for the American people. In support of these goals, the Committee decided at today’s meeting to maintain the target range for the federal funds rate at 5¼ to 5½ percent and to continue reducing our securities holdings. As the labor market has cooled and inflation has declined, the risks to achieving our employment and inflation goals continue to move into better balance. Indeed, we’re attentive to the risks to both sides of our dual mandate. We’ve stated that we do not expect it will be appropriate to reduce the target range for the federal funds rate until we have gained greater confidence that inflation is moving sustainably toward 2 percent. The second quarter’s inflation readings have added to our confidence, and more good data would further strengthen that confidence. We will continue to make our decisions meeting by meeting. We know that reducing policy restraint too soon or too much could result in a reversal of the progress we have seen on inflation. At the same time, reducing policy restraint too late or too little could unduly weaken economic activity and employment. In considering any adjustments to the target range for the federal funds rate, the Committee will carefully assess incoming data, the evolving outlook, and the balance of risks. As the economy evolves, monetary policy will adjust in order to best promote our maximum employment and price stability goals. If the economy remains solid and inflation persists, we can maintain the current target range for the federal funds rate as long as appropriate. If the labor market were to weaken unexpectedly or inflation were to fall more quickly than anticipated, we are prepared to respond. Policy is well positioned to deal with the risks and uncertainties that we face in pursuing both sides of our dual mandate. The Fed has been assigned two goals for monetary policy—maximum employment and stable prices. We remain committed to bringing inflation back down to our 2 percent goal and to keeping longer term inflation expectations well anchored. Restoring price stability is essential to achieving maximum employment and stable prices over the longer run. Our success in delivering on these goals matters to all Americans. We understand that our actions affect communities, families, and businesses across the country. Everything we do is in service to our public mission. We at the Fed will do everything we can to achieve our maximum employment and price stability goals. Thank you. I look forward to your questions. . Thank you. So on September, let me say this. We, we have made no decisions about future meetings, and that includes the September meeting. The broad sense of the Committee is that the economy is moving closer to the point at which it will be appropriate to reduce our policy rate. In that, we will be data dependent but not data point dependent, so it will not be a question of responding specifically to one or two data releases. The question will be whether the totality of the data, the evolving outlook, and the balance of risks are consistent with rising confidence on inflation and maintaining a solid labor market. If that test is met, a reduction in our policy rate could be on the table as soon as the next meeting in September. So you asked, why not today? And I would just say, again, that the broad sense of the Committee is that we’re getting closer to the point at which it will be appropriate to reduce our policy rate but that we’re not quite at that point yet. . So I guess I would—I would think about it this way. I’ll give an example of, of cases in which it would be appropriate to cut and maybe that it wouldn’t be appropriate to cut. So if we were to see, for example, inflation moving down quickly or more or less in line with expectations, growth remains, let’s say, reasonably strong, and the labor market remains, you know, consistent with its current condition, then I would think that a, a rate cut could be on the table at the September meeting. If, if inflation were to prove, you know, sticky and we were to see higher readings from inflation, disappointing readings, we would weigh that along with the other things. You know, I think it’s going to be not just any one thing. It’s going to be the inflation data, it’s going to be the employment data, it’s going to be the balance of risks as we see it—it’s going to be the totality of all of that that would help us make this decision. . I, I think it’s just a question of seeing more good data. We have seen—the last couple of readings have, have certainly added to confidence. And we’ve seen progress across all three categories of core PCE inflation—that’s goods, nonhousing services, and housing services. So it’s really just—you know, we had a quarter of poor inflation data at the beginning of the year. Then we saw some more good inflation data  we had seven months at the end of last year. You know, we just want to see more and, and gain confidence. And, as I said, we have—we did gain confidence, and more good data would cause us to, to gain more confidence. . You know, so I would just say, really, the path ahead is going to depend on the way the economy evolves. And I can’t really give you any, any better forward guidance on it than that. We didn’t, of course, do an SEP at this meeting. We will do another one at the September meeting. I would just say, I can—I can imagine a scenario in which there would be everywhere from zero cuts to several cuts, depending on the way the economy evolves, and I wouldn’t want to lay out a baseline path for you there today. I’ve said what I—what I can say about September and about today, though. . So this is the very reason that we’re thinking about—that we’ve said in our—in our statement that we’re going back to looking at both mandates and that we think the risks are coming back into balance. We think what the data broadly show in the labor market is an ongoing, gradual normalization of labor market conditions. And that’s what we want to see. You know, we’ve seen that over a period of a couple of years and a move, really, from overheated conditions to more normal conditions. We are watching the labor market conditions quite closely, and that’s what we’re seeing. If we—if we start to see something that looks to be more than that, then we’re well positioned to respond. That’s, that’s part of what we’re thinking. . So we have, we have—growth isn’t one of our three. We have two mandates, as you know. The labor market, maximum employment is one, and stable prices is another. So we weigh—we weigh those two things equally under the law. When we were far away from our inflation mandate, we had to focus on that. Now we’re back, back to a closer to even focus, so we’ll be looking at labor market conditions and asking whether we’re getting what we’re seeing. And, as I said, we’re prepared to respond if we see that it’s—that it’s not what we wanted to see, which was, you know, a gradual normalization of conditions—if we see more than that. And it wouldn’t be any one statistic, although, of course, the unemployment rate is generally thought to be, you know, a single—a good single statistic. But we’d be looking at wages, we’d be looking at participation, we’d be looking at all the things—surveys, quits, hires, all of those things—to determine the overall status of the labor market. But we’re looking at it now. I would say, again, I think you’re back to conditions that are close to 2019 conditions, and that was not an inflationary economy—broadly similar labor markets then. I think inflation was actually—core inflation was actually running below 2 percent. So we don’t think—I don’t now think of the labor market in its current state as a likely source of significant inflationary pressures. So I would—I would not like to see a material further cooling in the labor market, and that’s part of what’s behind our thinking. The other part, of course, is that we have made real progress on inflation. And we’re—we’ve got growing confidence there that we are not quite there yet, but we’re more confident that we’re on a—that we’re on a sustainable path down to 2 percent. So those two things are working together, and we’re factoring those both into our policy. . So I wouldn’t say I wouldn’t want to see any other cooling. It would be more of a material difference. If we—if we’d be looking at this and if we see something that looks like a more significant downturn, that would be something that we would—we would have the intention of responding to. So, in terms of—I don’t think of it that way. I think of it as, you know, we’re actually in a good place here. We’re balancing these two risks of, you know, go too soon, and you undermine progress on inflation  wait too long or don’t go fast enough, and, and you put at risk the recovery. And so we have to balance those two things. That’s the nature of having two mandates, and I think we—this is how we balance them. It’s a rough balance, but it does feel like, again, the labor market feels like it’s in a place where it’s just a process of ongoing normalization  4.1 percent unemployment is still historically low. And, you know, we’ll just have to see what the data show us. . So I think all of the data points continue to point to kind of the direction we would want to see. So that was taken as, you know, there was a decline in job openings. That was good. Today’s ECI reading was a little softer than expected, so that’s, that’s a good reading. It shows that wage increases are still at a strong level but that that level continues to come down to more sustainable levels over time. That’s exactly the pattern that we want to be seeing. So I think the data—the data we’ve been seeing in the labor market are broadly consistent with that normalization process. Again, we’re closely monitoring to see whether it starts to show signs that it’s more than that. . Yeah, I can’t really say that, honestly. You know, we’re—we— we’ve seen significant movement in the labor market, and, you know, we’re very mindful of this question of, is it just normalization or is it more? We think it’s just normalization, but we want to be in a position to, to support the labor market. At the same time, we’re seeing progress on inflation. So, you know, we actually got to this—we raised rates a year ago at the July meeting. And if you look at the situation in the economy a year ago, unemployment—sorry, inflation was over 4 percent. It was a completely different economy. Now we’ve made a lot of progress, and the labor market—I think unemployment was in the 3s, mid 3s, so it’s a different economy. And I think it’s time, it’s coming to be time, to adjust that so that we support this continued process. The thing we’re trying to do is—you know that we have, we’ve had this really significant decline in inflation, and unemployment has remained low. And this is a really unusual and historically, historically unusual and such a welcome outcome for the people we serve. What we’re thinking about all the time is, how do we keep this going? And this is—this is part of that. We think we don’t need to be 100 percent focused on inflation because of the progress we’ve made: 12 month headline at 2½ [percent], core at 2.6. You know, it’s way down from where it was. The job is not done on inflation, but, nonetheless, we can afford to begin to dial back the restriction in our policy rate. And I think we’re just—it’s part of a process. In terms of what that looks like, I mean, I think most rate—you would think, in a base case, that policy rates would move down from here, but I don’t want to try to give specific forward guidance about when that might be, the pace at which it might happen, because I think that’s really going to depend on the economy, and that’s highly uncertain. . Actually, what we’re seeing now is a little better than what we saw last year. Last year, as we pointed out late in the year, a whole lot of the progress we saw last year was from goods prices, which were going down at an unsustainable rate, disinflating at an unsustainable rate. This is a broader disinflation. This has goods prices coming down, but it’s also—we’re also now seeing progress in the other two big categories: nonhousing services and housing services. So, you know, the thing is, we’ve only—you’ve got one quarter of that. We had seven months of low inflation  you got one quarter of this. I would say the quality of this is, is higher, and it’s good, but so far, it’s only a quarter. So I think, you know, we need to see more to know that we’re—to have more confidence that we’re on, on a good path down to 2 percent. But as I mentioned, our confidence is growing because we’ve been getting good data. And things like the ECI report and, frankly, the softening in the labor market conditions, you know, give you more confidence that the economy’s not overheating. It doesn’t look like an overheating economy, and it looks like an economy that’s normalizing. . So the thing about—if what it is is seasonality, and it could just be— it’s very, very hard to, you know, to do appropriate seasonal adjustments. If that’s what it is, then that actually implies that, that other months were underreporting too low inflation. If you smoothed it out, it’s a zero sum game. And that’s why we look at 12 months. We look at 12 months because that takes all of that out, all those effects out. Twelve month now is 2½ percent headline, 2.6 percent core. This is so much better than where we were even a year ago. It’s a lot better. Now, the job is not done. I want to stress that, and we’re committed to getting the job—inflation sustainably under 2 percent, but we need to take note of that progress, and we need to weigh the risks to the labor market and the risks to our inflation target now more equally than we did a year ago. . I, I—you know, I think that we’ve been given an assignment by Congress. This is how we serve the American people is by achieving maximum employment and price stability, right? And so in our, you know, quasi constitutional document, the Statement on Longer Run Goals and Monetary Policy Strategy, we look at the two goals, and if one of them is farther away than the other—the two variables, inflation and employment—if one is farther away from its goal than the other, then you, you concentrate on the one that’s farther away. And you take account of the time to reach the goal. So, for the last couple of years, the best service we could do to the American people was to focus on inflation. But as inflation has come down—and I think the upside risks to inflation have decreased as the labor market has cooled off, and now the labor market has softened—you know, probably the inflation, inflation’s probably a little farther from its target than is employment, but I think the downside risks to, to the employment mandate are, are real now. So we have to weigh all that, and if you think about where that takes us is we have a restrictive policy rate. It’s clearly restrictive. It’s been the rate we’ve had in place for a full year. And the time is coming—as other central banks around the world are facing the same question—the time is coming at which it will begin to be appropriate to dial back that level of restrictions, restriction so that we may address both mandates. . “Certainty” is not a word that we have in our—in our business. So, you know, we get—we get a lot of data between now and September, and it isn’t going to be one data read or even two. It’s going to be the totality of the data, all of the data, and not just—and then how is that affecting the outlook? And how is it affecting the balance of risks? That’s going to be the assessment that we do. Of course, we’ll, we’ll all look carefully at the employment report, but so much other data coming in and so much happening between now and the September meeting, and we’ll, you know, we’ll make a judgment. . Well, you know, we’ll look at everything. We’ve seen some, some tendency to have a narrowing base of job creation in some months going back, but then we’ve had some months where, where job creation was broader. And also, you know, the headline number of jobs has come down, so—but you look at the whole thing. And I think you do look at private demand extra carefully, to your point about, about government. So we’ll just be looking at, at all those things. . Yeah, so look, the objective is to balance the two risks, right? It’s the risk of going too soon and the risk of going too late. We’ve been—you know, we, we had seven months of good inflation data at the end of last year. We said we wanted to see more. We said—we pointed out that too much of this was coming from goods, and, sure enough, the first quarter wasn’t, wasn’t great—inflation data. And now we’ve got another quarter—a quarter that is good. And, you know, we’re balancing the risk of going too soon against the risk of going too late. That’s what we’re doing. There’s no guarantee in this. It’s a very difficult judgment call, but this is—this is how we’re making it. So—but in terms of today, your question about today, we did have a—you know, we had a nice conversation about, about this issue today. The overall sense of the Committee, as I mentioned, is that we’re getting closer to the point at which it will be appropriate to begin to dial back restriction, but we’re not quite at that point yet. We want to see more good data. The decision was unanimous—all 19 participants supported it. But there was a real discussion back and forth of what the case would be for, for moving at this meeting. A strong majority supported moving—not moving at this meeting. That was the strong sense of the Committee. But it’s a conversation that we had today, certainly. . Yes, it does. And I think the lags have kind of showed up here in the last six months, by the way. You, you really do now see the restriction, whereas, I mean, even a few months ago, people were questioning how restrictive policy was. Look at the labor market now—you can see. And look at inflation—sorry—rate sensitive, interest sensitive spending. You really do see now that policy is restrictive. I wouldn’t say it’s extremely restrictive, but it’s certainly effectively restrictive. Yes, there—the lag should, should be on the way down. It should take some time to get into—to get into the full economy, affect financial conditions. And that affects economic activity, hiring and that kind of thing, and, ultimately, inflation. It doesn’t—it’s not instantaneous, although it’s faster than it used to be because markets move now in anticipation of our moves. . We have to worry about that. I mean, we—just to make it clear, you know, it’s a very difficult, challenging judgment, and we don’t want to go too soon, and we don’t want to go too late. But that’s—this is how we made that judgment. I feel good about where we are. We’re certainly very well positioned to respond to weakness with the policy rate at 5.3 percent. We certainly have a lot of room to respond if we were to see weakness. That’s not what we’re seeing, though. What we’re seeing—look at the—look at the first half growth numbers. Look at PDFP at 2.6 percent for the first half. It’s not signaling a weak economy. It’s also not signaling an overheating economy. Labor market—admittedly, the unemployment rate has moved up seven tenths, and we’re seeing—we’re seeing normalization there, but wage, wage increases are still at a high level. Unemployment is still at a low level. Layoffs are very low. Initial claims have moved up, but they’re pretty stable, and they’re historically not high at all. So the total scope of the data suggests a normalizing labor market, and, again, we are carefully watching to see that that continues to be the case. . We—so I would just say, the question really is, is one of, are we worried about a sharper downturn in the labor market? So, and the answer is, we’re watching really carefully for that. We’re, we’re aware of that rule, which is really a, you know, a—I would call it a statistical, statistical thing that has happened through history. A “statistical regularity” is what I’d call it. It’s not like an economic rule where it’s telling you something must happen. So, again, what do we see? What are our eyes telling us? We look at—we look at all the things we’re seeing, and what it looks like is a normalizing labor market—again, job creation at a pretty decent level, wages moving up at a strong level but coming down gradually. Job vacancies have come down, but they’re still high by historical standards. So, again, I’ve been through some of the data already, but what we think we’re seeing is, is a normalizing labor market, and we’re watching carefully to see if it—if it turns out to be more. If it starts to show signs that it’s more than that, then we’re well positioned to respond. . I think, you know, history doesn’t repeat itself  it rhymes. That statement is very true about the economy. You never assume it’s going to be just the same. An example would be, is there a trend increase in the level of vacancies? There are many, many examples, so it’s never exactly the same. Also, let’s remember that this pandemic era has been one in which so many, you know, apparent rules have been flouted, like the inverted yield curve for starters. So, many, many received—pieces of received wisdom just haven’t worked, and it’s because this situation really is unusual or unique in that so much of this inflation came from the shutdown of the economy and the resulting supply problems in the face of, admittedly, very strong demand. So the whole—the whole situation is not the same as many of the other prior inflation or downturns that we’ve seen or business cycles that we’ve seen. So we’re having to learn. We’re having to, to be very careful about the judgments that we make, I would say. So we don’t assume that these regularities will, will just repeat themselves automatically. . So I do take that seriously, and the Beige Book is great. What’s even greater is hearing the Reserve Bank presidents come in and talk about their conversations with, with businesses and business leaders and workers and people in the nonprofit sector in their Districts. But I’ll tell you, it’s a pretty—the picture is, is not one of a slowing or, you know, a really bad economy. It’s one of there are spots of weakness, and there are regions where growth is stronger than other regions, but, overall, it’s—again, look at the aggregate data. The aggregate data is—particularly PDFP, private domestic final purchases—is 2.6 percent, and that’s a good indicator of private—of private demand. So we listen to all of that, and it does, does—I think it’s important to listen to anecdotal data and not just look at the aggregate data. Especially, you know, it’s very hard—GDP data can be volatile quarter to quarter. So it’s just hard to measure economic activity. There are a lot of—it’s just difficult to do. So I look at both, but I wouldn’t say that the—that the anecdotal data is uniformly downbeat. It’s more mixed. . I absolutely do, and I think it’s—first of all, we haven’t made any decisions. I would say it this way: haven’t made any decision about any future meeting. I don’t know what the data will reveal or how that will affect the appropriate path of our policy. I really don’t know. I do know how we will make that assessment. That’s what I do know. So if you take a step back, the current situation, again, is inflation has come down much closer to our goal, and that’s happened while unemployment has remained low. We’re, we’re very tightly focused on using our tools to try to foster that state of affairs continuing. That’s at each of our meetings and all of our decisions, our focus is strictly on that and really on nothing else—doing our part, whatever that part may be. You know, we’re using our best thinking. We’re doing our best to understand the economy. We, we follow academics. We follow the many commentators who bless us with their commentary [laughter], but we don’t change anything in our approach to address other factors, like the political calendar. Congress has, we believe, ordered us to conduct our business in a nonpolitical way at all times, not just some of the time. I’ll say this, too: We never use our tools to support or oppose a political party, a politician, or any political outcome. The bottom line is, if we do our very best to do our part and we stick to our part, that will benefit all Americans. If we get it right, the economy will be stronger. We’ll have price stability. People will find jobs. Wages will rise in real terms. Everyone will benefit. So that’s what we believe, and that’s how we will always act. This is my fourth presidential election at the Fed. I can tell you this is how we think about it. This is what we do. So anything that we do before, during, or after the election will be based on the data, the outlook, and the balance of risks and not on anything else. . No. We do not do that. We absolutely do not do that. We don’t— we don’t know who’s going to win. We don’t know what they’re going to do. We don’t act as though we know, and we just can’t do that, you know? We basically—we have our forecast. We’re not—we can run simulations of different potential policies, but we would never try to make policy decisions based on the outcome of an election that hasn’t happened yet. We would just—that would just be a line we would never cross. You know, we’re a nonpolitical agency. We don’t want to be involved in any—in politics in any way, so we wouldn’t do that. . So there’s—there are always meaningful differences. There are. And, you know, we talk a lot before, during, and after the meeting. We do have a very robust discussion of these things. You’re right that in, in most cases, people, if they feel heard and they feel that they’ve—that their position has been given serious consideration, for most people, most of the time, that’s going to be enough. There are dissents. That’s fine. You know, no one has a veto. No single person has a veto, so it just is a question of, who will vote for and against? We’ve had—we’ve had, you know, dissents. We haven’t had so many during the pandemic era, and it just may be that we, we felt more united because we felt under a lot of pressure to get things right, but before the pandemic, we had plenty of dissents. And dissents happen. It’s part of the process. There’s nothing wrong with dissents, and if it happens, it happens. . You know, I don’t want to say—I don’t want to be really specific about what we’re going to do, but that’s, that’s not something we’re thinking about right now. . Of course, we haven’t made any decisions at all as of today. . Well, so, you know, the way the meeting is set up, the first day there’s a discussion of financial stability because it’s every other meeting we have that, and then we have an opportunity to comment on that. Then we have an economic go round. And then, this morning, we have the monetary policy go round. And I think in people’s economic or in their monetary policy go round, people express their views about this, and, you know, there’s a range of views. People—as you will know from the speeches that they give—people have different ways of thinking about the economy. And so, in the minutes, we’ll lay this out in a much—in a much better way than I can do off the cuff, but there’s a range of perspectives. And, you know—but I do think that we are, we’re a consensus driven organization. People come together. This was a unanimous—a unanimous decision. And, at the end, everyone, everyone supported the outcome—not just the voters, but everyone. So I would also say, some people examined the possibility, you know, the case for moving at this meeting, but, overwhelmingly, the sense of the Committee was not at this meeting but as soon as the next meeting, depending on how the data come in. . Yes. . Well, assuming that the totality of the data supports such an outcome. No question. That’s, that is the case, as I mentioned. We think that the time is, is— it’s approaching, and if we do get the data that we—that we hope we get, then a reduction in our policy rate could be on the table at the September meeting. . So this is the judgment that we have to make, and we’re, we’re well aware of the judgment. We’re—as I’ve said, we have to weigh the risk of going too soon against the risk of going too late. If we go too soon, we can—we had a lot of advice, you know, to go ahead and cut after the seven good months of last year. We didn’t. We said we needed to see more. Then we saw some higher inflation. We’ve seen one quarter of good inflation, and we’ve seen the labor market move quite a bit. And, as I mentioned, I don’t think it needs to cool off anymore for us to get the inflation results that are related to the labor market—not all inflation is, of course. So I think it’s a difficult judgment to make, and what you see is the judgment of the Committee is that that time is drawing near. That time could be in September if, if the data support that. . So I, I don’t know whether they’ve increased. I think they’re low. I think this is—you don’t see any reason to think that this economy is either overheating or sharply weakening. That’s just not in the data right now. What’s in the data right now is an economy that’s growing at a—at a solid pace, a labor market that has cooled off, but, nonetheless, inflation—sorry, unemployment is low. The data overall show a strong labor market. And so that’s, that’s really what you see. It’s not—it’s neither an overheating economy, nor is it a sharply weakening economy. It’s, it’s kind of what you would want to see, but, of course, the job is never done. You know, we’re, we’re watching to see, you know, which way the economy heads. And I think we’re—if we are to respond to weakness, we’re certainly, you know, well equipped to do that. But that’s not what we’re seeing. What we’re seeing is strong economic activity and, you know, a good labor market and inflation coming down. . Yeah, I mean, I think the reality is that, that forecasters—and this isn’t just the Fed by any means—forecasters have been continually surprised by, for example, the strength of the economy last year. So I think we had to be pretty humble about, about giving forward guidance about this, that, and the other thing. We need to be pretty careful about that. And, you know, when you’re saying you’re going to be data driven, of course, it’s always what the data—how they affect the outlook and the balance of risks, but it’s—nobody has great vision deep into the future. In terms of a reaction function, that’s a—that’s a long time discussion that people have had forever. I think people have understood for a long time, actually, that we were very focused on bringing down inflation. Nobody was really confused about that. The data have, you know— again, we’ve seen significant improvement in inflation just for the last quarter. Markets move around on that—on the data, really. Not so much—it’s not really what we’re going to do. It’s more just that the data keep coming in, and markets are very, very responsive to that data right now. . It’s not something that comes up at all with the—in the FOMC. So, more broadly, digital finance is an area that’s having—that has really significant implications for payments generally, instant payments. And, you know, it’s something that’s going to really change the way—it’s going to make more efficient and, hopefully, safer and all those things— the way payments are made around the world. And so we have people who are researching that and trying to keep up to speed, because we play an important role in the payments sector, both as a convener and as an operator, too. In terms of a CBDC, there’s really nothing new going on. There’s not much going on at all. We’re not—we don’t have the authority to issue a CB—a retail CBDC that’s available to the public. We’re not seeking that authority. So what we’re doing is keeping up with—keeping up with developments there. Pretty much every major central bank in the world is at least doing, doing that. Some of them are actually seriously looking at implementing a CBDC. We’re really not. We’re really just evaluating, you know, the story and what’s happening out there. So I think it’s work that we need to be doing, which could be very beneficial down the road, but we don’t have—on a CBDC, we don’t have any plan to. We would need to go to Congress, and we have no plan to do that. We’re not—no one here has decided that we think it’s a good idea yet. Thank you.

****FOMCpresconf20240918

. Good afternoon. My colleagues and I remain squarely focused on achieving our dual mandate goals of maximum employment and stable prices for the benefit of the American people. Our economy is strong overall and has made significant progress toward our goals over the past two years. The labor market has cooled from its formerly overheated state. Inflation has eased substantially from a peak of 7 percent to an estimated 2.2 percent as of August. We’re committed to maintaining our economy’s strength by supporting maximum employment and returning inflation to our 2 percent goal. Today, the Federal Open Market Committee decided to reduce the degree of policy restraint by lowering our policy interest rate by ½ percentage point. This decision reflects our growing confidence that with an appropriate recalibration of our policy stance, strength in the labor market can be maintained in a context of moderate growth and inflation moving sustainably down to 2 percent. We also decided to continue to reduce our securities holdings. I will have more to say about monetary policy after briefly reviewing economic developments. Recent indicators suggest that economic activity has continued to expand at a solid pace. GDP rose at an annual rate of 2.2 percent in the first half of the year, and available data point to a roughly similar pace of growth this quarter. Growth of consumer spending has remained resilient, and investment in equipment and intangibles has picked up from its anemic pace last year. In the housing sector, investment fell back in the second quarter after rising strongly in the first. Improving supply conditions have supported resilient demand and the strong performance of the U.S. economy over the past year. In our Summary of Economic Projections, Committee participants generally expect GDP growth to remain solid, with a median projection of 2 percent over the next few years. In the labor market, conditions have continued to cool. Payroll job gains averaged 116,000 per month over the past three months, a notable step down from the pace seen earlier in the year. The unemployment rate has moved up but remains low at 4.2 percent. Nominal wage growth has eased over the past year, and the jobs to workers gap has narrowed. Overall, a broad set of indicators suggests that conditions in the labor market are now less tight than just before the pandemic in 2019. The labor market is not a source of elevated inflationary pressures. The median projection for the unemployment rate in the SEP is 4.4 percent at the end of this year, four tenths higher than projected in June. Inflation has eased notably over the past two years but remains above our longer run goal of 2 percent. Estimates based on the consumer price index and other data indicate that total PCE prices rose 2.2 percent over the 12 months ending in August and that, excluding the volatile food and energy categories, core PCE prices rose 2.7 percent. Longer term inflation expectations appear to remain well anchored, as reflected in a broad range of surveys of households, businesses, and forecasters as well as measures from financial markets. The median projection in the SEP for total PCE inflation is 2.3 percent this year and 2.1 percent next year, somewhat lower than projected in June. Thereafter, the median projection is 2 percent. Our monetary policy actions are guided by our dual mandate to promote maximum employment and stable prices for the American people. For much of the past three years, inflation ran well above our 2 percent goal, and labor market conditions were extremely tight. Our primary focus had been on bringing down inflation, and appropriately so. We are acutely aware that high inflation imposes significant hardship, as it erodes purchasing power, especially for those least able to meet the higher costs of essentials like food, housing, and transportation. Our restrictive monetary policy has helped restore the balance between aggregate supply and demand, easing inflationary pressures and ensuring that inflation expectations remain well anchored. Our patient approach over the past year has paid dividends: Inflation is now much closer to our objective, and we have gained greater confidence that inflation is moving sustainably toward 2 percent. As inflation has declined and the labor market has cooled, the upside risks to inflation have diminished, and the downside risks to employment have increased. We now see the risks to achieving our employment and inflation goals as roughly in balance, and we are attentive to the risks to both sides of our dual mandate. In light of the progress on inflation and the balance of risks, at today’s meeting, the Committee decided to lower the target range for the federal funds rate by ½ percentage point to 4¾ percent to 5 percent. This recalibration of our policy stance will help maintain the strength of the economy and the labor market and will continue to enable further progress on inflation as we begin the process of moving toward a more neutral stance. We are not on any preset course. We will continue to make our decisions meeting by meeting. We know that reducing policy restraint too quickly could hinder progress on inflation. At the same time, reducing restraint too slowly could unduly weaken economic activity and employment. In considering additional adjustments to the target range for the federal funds rate, the Committee will carefully assess incoming data, the evolving outlook, and the balance of risks. In our SEP, FOMC participants wrote down their individual assessments of an appropriate path for the federal funds rate, based on what each participant judges to be the most likely scenario going forward. If the economy evolves as expected, the median participant projects that the appropriate level of the federal funds rate will be 4.4 percent at the end of this year and 3.4 percent at the end of 2025. These median projections are lower than in June, consistent with the projections for lower inflation and higher unemployment, as well as the changed balance of risks. These projections, however, are not a Committee plan or decision. As the economy evolves, monetary policy will adjust in order to best promote our maximum employment and price stability goals. If the economy remains solid and inflation persists, we can dial back policy restraint more slowly. If the labor market were to weaken unexpectedly or inflation were to fall more quickly than anticipated, we are prepared to respond. Policy is well positioned to deal with the risks and uncertainties that we face in pursuing both sides of our dual mandate. The Fed has been assigned two goals for monetary policy—maximum employment and stable prices. We remain committed to supporting maximum employment, bringing inflation back down to our 2 percent goal, and keeping longer term inflation expectations well anchored. Our success in delivering on these goals matters to all Americans. We understand that our actions affect communities, families, and businesses across the country. Everything we do is in service to our public mission. We at the Fed will do everything we can to achieve our maximum  employment and price stability goals. Thank you. I look forward to your questions. . So, okay, a lot of questions in there. [Laughter] Let me jump in. So, since the last meeting—okay, the last meeting we have had a lot of data come in. We’ve had the two employment reports, July and August. We’ve also had two inflation reports, including one that came in during blackout. We had the QCEW report, which suggests that maybe—that not maybe, but suggests that the payroll report numbers that we’re getting may be artificially high and will be revised down. You know that. We’ve also seen anecdotal data, like [the data collected in] the Beige Book. So we took all of those, and we went into blackout. And we thought about what to do, and we concluded that this was the right thing for the economy, for the people that we serve, and that’s, that’s how we made our decision. So that’s one question. What was the second and third? . Sure. So a couple things. A good place to start is the—is the SEP, but let me start with what I said, which was that we’re going to be making decisions meeting by meeting based on the incoming data, the evolving outlook, the balance of risks. If you look at the SEP, you’ll, you’ll see that it’s, it’s a process of recalibrating our policy stance away from where we had it a year ago, when inflation was high and unemployment low, to a place that’s more appropriate given where we are now and where we expect to be. And that process will take place over time. There’s nothing in the—in the SEP that suggests the Committee is in a rush to get this done. This, this process evolves over time. Of course, that’s a projection. That’s a baseline projection. We know, as I mentioned in my remarks, that the actual things that we do will depend on the way the economy evolves. We can go quicker if that’s appropriate. We can go slower if that’s appropriate. We can pause if that’s appropriate. But that’s, that’s what we are contemplating. Again, I would point you to the SEP as just an assessment of where—what the Committee is thinking today—what the individual members, rather, of the Committee are thinking today, assuming that their particular forecasts take—you know, are realized. . I think it would—the way I would really characterize it is this: I think people write down their estimate, individuals do. I think every single person on the Committee, if you asked them, what’s your level of certainty around that, they would say there’s a wide range where that could fall. So I think we don’t know. There are model based approaches and empirically based approaches that estimate what the neutral rate will be at any given time. But, realistically, we know it by its works. So that leaves us in a place where we’ll be—where we expect, in the base case, to be continuing to remove restriction, and we’ll be looking at the way the economy reacts to that. And that’ll be guiding us in our thinking about the question that we’re asking at every meeting, which is, is our policy stance the appropriate one? We know—if you go back, we know that the policy stance we adopted in July of 2023 came at a time when unemployment was 3½ percent and inflation was 4.2 percent. Today, unemployment is up to 4.2 percent  inflation’s down to a few tenths above 2. So we know that it is time to recalibrate our policy to something that is more appropriate given the progress on inflation and on employment moving to a more sustainable level. So the balance of risks are now even. And this is the beginning of that process I mentioned, the direction of which is toward a sense of neutral, and we’ll move as fast or as slow as we think is appropriate in real time. What you have is our individual—accumulation of individual estimates of what that will be in the base case. . I think we had a good—a good discussion. You know, if you go back, I talked about this at Jackson Hole, but I didn’t address the question of the size of the cut and left it open, and I think we left it open going into blackout. And so there was a lot of discussion back and forth, good diversity of—excellent discussion today. I think there was also broad support for the decision that the Committee voted on. So I would add, though, look at the SEP. All 19 of the participants wrote down multiple cuts this year. All 19. That’s a big change from June, right? Seven of the—seven of them wrote down three or more and—sorry, 17 of the 19 wrote down three or more cuts, and 10 of the 19 wrote down four or more cuts. So, you know, there is a dissent, and there’s a range of views, but there’s actually a lot of common ground as well. . We’re going to take it meeting by meeting, as I mentioned. There’s no sense that the Committee feels it’s in a rush to do this. We made a good, strong start to this, and that’s really, frankly, a sign of our confidence—confidence that inflation is, is coming down toward 2 percent on a sustainable basis. That gives us the ability. We can, you know, make a good, strong start. But—and I’m very pleased that we did. To me, the logic of this, both from an economic standpoint and also from a risk management standpoint, was clear. But I think we’re going to go carefully, meeting by meeting, and make our decisions as we go. . So, again, the labor market is actually in solid condition, and our intention with our policy move today is to keep it there. You can say that about the whole economy. The U.S. economy is in good shape. It’s growing at a solid pace, inflation is coming down, the labor market is in a strong pace, we want to keep it there. That’s, that’s what we’re doing. . Okay, multiple questions in there. So I would say we don’t think we’re behind. We do not think—we think this is timely, but I think you can take this as a sign of our commitment not to get behind. So it’s, it’s a strong move. Sorry, your other question was? . So I think it’s about—we come into this with a policy position that was put in place, as you know, I mentioned, in July of 2023, which was a time of high inflation and very low unemployment. We’ve been very patient about, about reducing the policy rate. We’ve waited. Other central banks around the world have cut, many of them several times. We’ve waited, and I think that that patience has really paid dividends in the form of our confidence that inflation is moving sustainably under 2 percent. So I think that is what enables us to take this, this strong move today. I do not think that anyone should look at this and say, “Oh, this is the new pace.” You know, you have to think about it in terms of the base case. Of course, what happens will happen. So, so, in the base case, what you see is—look at the SEP, you see cuts moving along. The sense of this is we’re recalibrating policy down over time to a more neutral level. And we’re moving at the pace that we think is appropriate given developments in the economy and the base case. The economy can develop in a way that would cause us to go faster or slower, but that’s what the base case is. . So, in the current situation, reserves have really been stable. They haven’t come down. So reserves are still abundant and expected to remain so for some time. As you know, the shrinkage in our balance sheet has really come out of the overnight RRP [facility]. So I think what that tells you is, we’re not thinking about, about stopping runoff because of this at all. We know that these two things can happen side by side. In a sense, they’re both a form of normalization, and so, for a time, you can have the balance sheet shrinking but also be cutting rates. . So I think what we’re seeing is, clearly labor market conditions have cooled off by any measure, as I talked about in Jackson Hole, and—but they’re still at a level— the level of those conditions is actually pretty close to what I would call maximum employment. So you’re close to mandate, maybe at mandate, on that. So what’s driving it? Clearly, clearly payroll job creation has moved down over the last few months, and this bears watching. Many— By many other measures, the labor market has returned to or below 2019 levels, which was a very good, strong labor market, but this is more sort of 2018, ’17. So the labor market bears close—bears close watching, and we’ll be giving it that. But ultimately, we think—we believe, with an appropriate recalibration of our policy, that we can continue to see the economy growing, and that will support the labor market. In the meantime, if you look at the growth in economic activity data, retail sales data that we just got, second quarter GDP—all of this indicates an economy that is still growing at a solid pace. So that should also support the labor market over time. So—but again, we’re—it bears watching. And we’re watching. . So we’re—that’s—you know, our plan, of course, has been to begin to recalibrate and we’re—as you know, we’re not seeing rising claims, we’re not seeing rising layoffs, we’re not seeing that, and we’re not hearing that from companies that that’s something that’s getting ready to happen. So we’re not waiting for that, because, you know, there is—there is thinking that the time to support the labor market is when—is when it’s strong and not when we begin to see the layoffs. There’s some lore on that. So that’s the situation we’re in. We have, in fact, begun the cutting cycle now, and we’ll be watching—and that’ll be one of the factors that we consider. Of course, we’re going to look at the totality of the data as we make these decisions meeting by meeting. . We’re going to be watching all of the data, right? So if—as I mentioned in my remarks, if the labor market were to slow unexpectedly, then we have the ability to react to that by, by cutting faster. We’re also going to be looking at our other mandate, though. We are more—we have greater confidence now that inflation is moving down to 2 percent, but, at the same time, our plan is that we will be at 2 percent, you know, over time. So—and policy, we think, is still restrictive, so that should still be happening. . So, you know, what I would say is, we don’t think we need to see further loosening in labor market conditions to get inflation down to 2 percent. But we have a dual mandate, and I think you can take this whole action as—take a step back, what have we been trying to achieve? We’re trying to achieve a situation where we restore price stability without the kind of painful increase in unemployment that has come sometimes with disinflation. That’s what we’re trying to do. And I think you can take today’s action as a sign of our strong commitment to achieve that goal. . Sure. So we’ll start with unemployment, which is the single most important one probably. You’re at 4.2 percent. That’s, you know—I know it’s higher than we were used to seeing, numbers in the mid  and even below mid 3s last year, but, if you look back over the sweep of the years, that’s, that’s a low. That’s a very healthy unemployment rate. And anything in the low 4s is, is a really—is a good labor market. So that’s one thing. Participation is at high levels. It’s, you know—we’ve had—we’re right—adjusted for demographics for aging, participation’s at pretty high levels. That’s a good thing. Wages are still a bit above what would be their—wage increases, rather, are still just a bit above where they would be over the very longer term to be consistent with 2 percent inflation, but they’re very much coming down to what that sustainable level is. So we feel good about that. Vacancies over—per unemployed is back to what is still a very strong level. It’s not as high as it was. That number reached two to one, two vacancies for every unemployed person. As measured, it’s now below—it’s around one. But that’s still—that’s still a very good number, I would say. You know, quits have come back down to normal levels. I mean, I could go on and on. There are many, many employment indicators. What do they say? They say this is still a solid labor market. The question isn’t the level  the question is that there has been change, particularly over the last few months, and, you know, so what we say is, as the risks, the upside risks, to inflation have really come down, the downside risks to employment have increased. And, and because we have been patient and held our fire on cutting while, while inflation has come down, I think we’re now in a very good position to manage the risks to both of our goals. . You know, more data, the usual. Don’t look for anything else. We’ll see another labor report. We’ll see another jobs report. I think we get a—we might, actually— we get two—we get a second jobs report on the day of the meeting, I think, or no, no, on the Friday before the meeting. So—and inflation data. We’ll get all this data. We’ll be watching. You know, it’s always a question of, look at the incoming data and ask what are the implications of that data for the evolving outlook and the balance of risks and then go through our process and think, what’s the right thing to do? Is policy where we want it to be to foster the achievement of our goals over time? So that’s what it is, and that’s what we’ll be doing. . So, on the job creation, it depends on—it depends on the inflows, right? So, if you’re having millions of people come into the labor force then, and you’re creating 100,000 jobs, you’re going to see unemployment go up. So it really depends on what’s the trend underlying the volatility of people coming into the country. We understand there’s been quite an influx across the borders, and that has actually been one of the things that’s, that’s, that’s allowed the unemployment rate to rise. And the other thing is just the slower hiring rate, which is something we also watch carefully. So it does depend on what’s happening on the supply side. On the Beveridge curve question, yes, so we all felt, on the Committee, not all, but I think everyone on the Committee felt that job openings were so elevated that they could fall a long way before you hit the part of the curve where job openings turned into higher unemployment, job loss. And yes, I mean, I think we are—it’s hard to know that—you can’t know these things with great precision, but certainly it appears that we’re very close to that point, if not at it, so that further declines in job openings will translate more directly into unemployment. But it’s been— it’s been a great ride down. I mean, we’ve seen a lot of, of tightness come out of the labor market in that form without it resulting in lower employment. . So this is a question—and you mean after we get through all of this? It’s just—great question that we just, we can only speculate about. Intuitively, most—many, many people anyway, would say we’re probably not going back to that era where there were trillions of dollars of sovereign bonds trading at negative rates—long term bonds trading at negative rates. And it looked like the neutral rate was—might even be negative, so—and it was—people were issuing debt at negative rates. It seems that’s so far away now. My own sense is that we’re not going back to that. But, you know, honestly, we’re going to find out. But, you know, it feels—it feels to me that the neutral rate is probably significantly higher than it was back then. How high is it? I don’t—I just don’t think we know. It’s—again, we only know it by its works. . Yeah, so, you know, this is my fourth presidential election at the Fed, and, you know, it’s always the same. We’re always—we’re always going into this meeting, in particular, and asking, what’s the right thing to do for the people we serve? And we do that, and we make a decision as a group, and then we announce it. And it’s—that’s always what it is. It’s never about anything else. Nothing else is discussed, and I would also point out that the things that we do really affect economic conditions for the most part with a lag. So, nonetheless, this is what we do. Our job is to support the economy on behalf of the American people. And, if we get it right, this will benefit the American people significantly. So this really concentrates the mind, and, you know, it’s something we all take very, very seriously. We don’t put up any other filters. I think if you start doing that, I don’t know where you stop. And so we just don’t do that. . I would just say that, you know, the U.S. economy is in a good place, and, and our decision today is designed to keep it there. More specifically, the economy is growing at a solid pace, inflation is coming down closer to our 2 percent objective over time, and the labor market is still in solid shape. So our intention is really to maintain the strength that we currently see in the U.S. economy. And we’ll do that by returning rates from their high level, which has really been—the purpose of which has been to get inflation under control. We’re, we’re going to move those down over time to a more normal level over time. . No, we’re not. So inflation, you know—what we say is we want inflation—the goal is to have inflation move down to 2 percent on a sustainable basis. And, you know, we’re not really—we’re close, but we’re not really at 2 percent. And I think we’re going to want to see it be, you know, around 2 percent and close to 2 percent for some time, but we’re certainly not doing—we’re not saying “mission accomplished” or anything like that. But I have to say, though, we’re encouraged by the progress that we have made. . So housing inflation is the—is the one piece that is kind of dragging a bit, if I can say. We know that market rents are doing what we would want them to do, which is to be moving up at relatively low levels, but they’re not rolling over—the leases that are rolling over are not coming down as much and OER is coming in high. So, you know, it’s been slower than we expected. I think we now understand that it’s going to take some time for those lower market rents to get into this. But, you know, the direction of travel is clear, and as long as market rents remain, you know, relatively low inflation, over time that will show up, just the time it’s taking now, several years rather than just one or two cycles of annual lease renewals. So that’s—I think we understand that now, but I don’t think the outcome is in doubt again. As long as market rents remain under control, the outcome is not as in doubt. So I would say it’s—the rest of the portfolio—or of the elements that go into core PCE inflation have behaved pretty well. You know, they’re all—they all have some volatility. We will get down to 2 percent inflation, I believe, and I believe that, ultimately, we’ll get what we need to get out of the housing services piece, too. . The housing market, it’s hard to—it’s a game that—the housing market is in part frozen because of lock in with low rates. People don’t want to sell their homes. So, because they have a very low mortgage, it would be quite expensive to refinance. As rates come down, people will start to move more, and that’s probably beginning to happen already. But remember, when that happens, you’ve got a seller, but you’ve also got a new buyer in many cases. So it’s not, you know, obvious how much additional demand that would make. I mean, the real issue with housing is that we have had, and are on track to continue to have, not enough housing. And so it’s going to be challenging. It’s hard to find—to zone lots that are in places where people want to live. It’s—all of the aspects of housing are more and more difficult, and, you know, where are we going to get the supply? And this is not something that the Fed can, can really fix. But I think, as we normalize rates, you’ll see the housing market normalize. And, I mean, ultimately by getting inflation broadly down and getting those rates normalized and getting the housing cycle normalized, that’s the best thing we can do for house holders. And then the supply question will have to be dealt with by the market and also by government. . So you’re right about lags, but I would just point to the overall economy. You have an economy that is growing at a solid pace. If you look at forecasters or talk to companies, they’ll say that they think 2025 should be a good year, too. So there’s no sense—the U.S. economy is basically fine if you talk to market participants, I mean, you know, business people who are actually out there doing business. So I think, you know, I think our move is timely. I do. And, as I said, you can—you can see our, our 50 basis point move as a commitment to make sure that we don’t fall behind. So you’re really asking about—your second question, you’re asking about July. And I guess if you ask if we’d gotten the July report before the meeting, would we have cut? We might well have. We didn’t make that decision, but we might well have. I think that’s not—you know, that doesn’t really answer the question that we ask ourselves, which is, let’s look, you know—at this meeting we’re looking back to the July employment report, the August employment report, the two CPI reports, one of which came, of course, during blackout, and all of the other things that I mentioned. We’re looking at all of those things, and we’re asking ourselves, what’s the right—what’s the policy stance we need to move to? We knew—it’s clear that we—clearly, literally, everyone on the Committee agreed that it’s time to move. It’s just how big—how fast do you go, and what do you think about the paths forward. So this decision we made today had broad support on the Committee, and I’ve discussed the path ahead. . Very hard for me to say. That’s—from our standpoint, I can’t really speak to mortgage rates. I will say that’ll depend on how the economy evolves. Our intention, though, is—we think that our policy was appropriately restrictive. We think that it’s time to begin the process of recalibrating it to a level that’s more neutral, rather than restrictive. We expect that process to take some time, as you can see in the projections that we released today. And as—if things work out according to that forecast, other rates in the economy will come down as well. However, the rate at which those things happen will really depend on how the economy performs. We can’t see—we can’t look a year ahead and know what the economy is to be doing—going to be doing. . Well, what I can say to the public is that we had the highest—we had a burst of inflation. Many other countries around the world had a similar burst of inflation, and, when that happens, part of the answer is that we raise interest rates in order to cool the economy off in order to reduce inflationary pressures. It’s not something that people experience as pleasant, but, at the end, what you get is low inflation restored, price stability restored. And a good definition of price stability is that people in their daily decisions, they’re not thinking about inflation anymore. That’s where everyone wants to be, is back to what’s inflation, you know? Just keep it low, keep it stable. We’re restoring that. So what we’re going through now really restores—it will benefit people over a long period of time. Price stability benefits everybody over a long period of time, just by virtue of the fact that they don’t have to deal with inflation. So that’s what’s been going on, and I think we’ve made real progress. I completely—we don’t tell people how to think about the economy, of course. And, of course, people are [still] experiencing high prices, as opposed to high inflation. And we understand that’s painful. . We’re always going to try to do what we think is the right thing for the economy at that time. That’s what we’ll do. And that’s what we did today. . So we will continue to look at that broad array of labor market data, including the payroll numbers. We’re not discarding those. I mean, we’ll certainly look at those, but we will mentally tend to adjust them based on the QCEW adjustment, which you referred to. There isn’t a bright line. You know, it will be—the unemployment rate’s very important, of course, but there isn’t a single statistic or single bright line over which that thing that might move that would dictate one thing or another. We’ll look at—each meeting, we’ll look at all the data on inflation, economic activity, and the labor market, and we’ll make decisions about, is our policy stance where it needs to be to foster over the medium term our mandate goals? So I can’t—I can’t say we have a bright line in mind. . Sure. So countries that are—democracies around the world, countries that are sort of like the United States, all have what are called independent central banks. And the reason is that people have found over time that insulating the central bank from direct control by political authorities avoids making monetary policy in a way that favors maybe people who are in office as opposed to people who are not in office. So that’s the idea, is that— you know, I think the data are clear that countries that have independent central banks, they get lower inflation. And so we’re, we’re not—we do our work to serve all Americans. We’re not serving any politician, any political figure, any cause, any issue, nothing. It’s just maximum employment and price stability on behalf of all Americans. And that’s how the other central banks are set up, too. It’s a good institutional arrangement, which has been good for the public and I hope—and I hope and strongly believe that it will continue. . You know what, hold the second question. . We’ll give you the second question. So the answer to your question is that, yes, those, those changes were negotiated between the agencies with my support and with my involvement, with the idea that we were going to re propose, re propose the changes that Vice Chair Barr talked about and then take comment on them. So, yes, that is—that’s happening with my support. . That’s not a final proposal, though, you understand. We’re putting them out for comment. We’re going to take comment and make appropriate changes. We don’t have a—we don’t have a calendar date for that, and, as for the other agencies, you know, the idea is that we’re all moving together, we’re not moving separately, so that—I don’t know exactly where that is. But the idea is that we will move as a group to put this, again, out for comment, and then, you know, it’ll—the comments will come back 60 days later, and we’ll dive into them, and we’ll try to bring this to a conclusion sometime in the first half of next year. . You know, I would—I would bounce that question to Vice Chair Barr. It’s a good question, but I don’t have that today. Thanks. . No, I think—I think, and we think, they are now roughly balanced. So if you go back for a long time, the risks were on inflation. We had a historically tight labor market, historically tight. There was a severe labor shortage, so very hot labor market. And we had inflation way above target. So, you know, that said to us, concentrate on inflation, concentrate on inflation. And we did for a while, and we kept at that, that the stance that we put in place 14 months ago was a stance that was focused on bringing down inflation. Part of bringing down inflation, though, is cooling off the economy and a little bit cooling off the labor market. You now have a cooler labor market, in part because of our activity. So what that tells you is, it’s time to change our stance. So we did that. The sense of the change in the stance is that we’re recalibrating our policy over time to a stance that will be more neutral. And today was—I think we made a good strong start on that. I think it was the right decision, and I think it should send a signal that we, you know, that we’re committed to coming up with a good outcome here. . I don’t think so. I don’t—there’s—as I look—well, let me look at it this way: I don’t see anything in the economy right now that suggests that the likelihood of a recession—sorry, of a downturn is elevated, okay? I don’t see that. You see—you see growth at a solid rate, you see inflation coming down, and you see a labor market that’s, that’s still at very solid levels. So, so I don’t really see that, no. Thank you.

****FOMCpresconf20241107

. Good afternoon. My colleagues and I remain squarely focused on achieving our dual mandate goals of maximum employment and stable prices for the benefit of the American people. The economy is strong overall and has made significant progress toward our goals over the past two years. The labor market has cooled from its formerly overheated state and remains solid. Inflation has eased substantially from a peak of 7 percent to 2.1 percent as of September. We are committed to maintaining our economy’s strength by supporting maximum employment and returning inflation to our 2 percent goal. Today, the FOMC decided to take another step in reducing the degree of policy restraint by lowering our policy interest rate by ¼ percentage point. We continue to be confident that, with an appropriate recalibration of our policy stance, strength in the economy and the labor market can be maintained, with inflation moving sustainably down to 2 percent. We also decided to continue to reduce our securities holdings. I’ll have more to say about monetary policy after briefly reviewing economic developments. Recent indicators suggest that economic activity has continued to expand at a solid pace. GDP rose at an annual rate of 2.8 percent in the third quarter, about the same pace as in the second quarter. Growth of consumer spending has remained resilient, and investment in equipment and intangibles has strengthened. In contrast, activity in the housing sector has been weak. Overall, improving supply conditions have supported the strong performance of the U.S. economy over the past year. In the labor market, conditions remain solid. Payroll job gains have slowed from earlier in the year, averaging 104,000 per month over the past three months. This figure would have been somewhat higher were it not for the effects of labor strikes and hurricanes on employment in October. Regarding the hurricanes, let me extend our sympathies to all the families, businesses, and communities who have been harm—harmed by these devastating storms. The unemployment rate is notably higher than it was a year ago but has edged down over the past three months and remains low at 4.1 percent in October. Nominal wage growth has eased over the past year, and the jobs to workers gap has narrowed. Overall, a broad set of indicators suggests that conditions in the labor market are now less tight than just before the pandemic in 2019. The labor market is not a source of significant inflationary pressures. Inflation has eased significantly over the past two years. Total PCE prices rose 2.1 percent over the 12 months ending in September  excluding the volatile food and energy categories, core PCE prices rose 2.7 percent. Overall, inflation has moved much closer to our 2 percent longer run goal, but core inflation remains somewhat elevated. Longer term inflation expectations appear to remain well anchored, as reflected in a broad range of surveys of households, businesses, and forecasters, as well as measures from financial markets. Our monetary policy actions are guided by our dual mandate to promote maximum employment and stable prices for the American people. We see the risks to achieving our employment and inflation goals as being roughly in balance, and we’re attentive to the risks to both sides of our mandate. At today’s meeting, the Committee decided to lower the target range for the federal funds rate by ¼ percentage point, to 4½ percent to 4¾ percent. This further recalibration of our policy stance will help maintain the strength of the economy and the labor market and will continue to enable further progress on inflation as we move toward a more neutral stance over time. We know that reducing policy strain—restraint too quickly could hinder progress on inflation. At the same time, reducing policy restraint too slowly could unduly weaken economic activity and employment. In considering additional adjustments to the target range for the federal funds rate, the Committee will carefully assess incoming data, the evolving outlook, and the balance of risks. We are not on any preset course. We will continue to make our decisions meeting by meeting. As the economy evolves, monetary policy will adjust in order to best promote our maximum employment and price stability goals. If the economy remains strong and inflation is not sustainably moving toward 2 percent, we can dial back policy restraint more slowly. If the labor market were to weaken unexpectedly or inflation were to fall more quickly than anticipated, we can move more quickly. Policy is well positioned to deal with the risks and uncertainties that we face in pursuing both sides of our dual mandate. The Fed has been assigned two goals for monetary policy—maximum employment and stable prices. We remain committed to supporting maximum employment, bringing inflation sustainably to our 2 percent goal, and keeping longer term inflation expectations well anchored. Our success in delivering on these goals matters to all Americans. We understand that our affect—actions affect communities, families, and businesses across the country. Everything we do is in service to our public mission. We at the Fed will do everything we can to achieve our maximum employment and price stability goals. Thank you. I look forward to our discussion. . Sure. So let me say that in the near term, the election will have no effects on our policy decisions. As you know, many, many things affect the economy, and anyone who writes down forecasts in their job will tell you that the economy is quite difficult to forecast, looking out past the very near term. Here, we don’t know what the timing and substance of any policy changes will be. We therefore don’t know what the effects on the economy would be—specifically, whether and to what extent those policies would matter for the achievement of our goal variables: maximum employment and price stability. We don’t—we don’t guess, we don’t speculate, and we don’t assume. Now, just in principle, it’s possible that any Administration’s policies or, or policies put in place by Congress could have economic effects over time—over time that would matter for our pursuit of our dual mandate goals. So, we—along with countless other factors, forecasts of those economic effects would be included in our models of the economy and would be taken into account through that channel. . So I would just say this. We’ve watched the, the run up in bond rates, and it’s, it’s nowhere where it was, of course, a year ago. I guess that, you know, the long  run rates are well below that level. So we’re watching that. Things have been moving around, and we’ll see where they settle. I think it’s too early to really say where they settle. Ultimately, I’m sure we’ve all read these decompositions of what, you know—and I certainly have, but it’s not really our job to provide our specific decomposition. I will say, though, that it appears that the moves are not, not principally about higher inflation expectations. They’re really about a sense of more likely to have stronger growth and perhaps less in the way of downside risks. So that’s what they’re about. You know, we do take financial conditions into account. If they—if they’re persistent and if they’re material, then we’ll certainly take them into account in our policy. But I would say we’re not at—we’re not at that stage right now. It’s just something that we’re watching. And, again, these things don’t really have mainly to do with, with Fed policy, but to do with other factors in the economy. . You know what? It’s—you get halfway through the cycle between the last set and the next set. I, I wouldn’t want to comment one way or the other. You know, people are—let’s talk about the data we’ve gotten since the last meeting. So, in the main, the economic activity data have been stronger than expected. The NIPA revision was stronger. Certainly, the September employment report was stronger  the October report, not stronger  retail sales, stronger. So, overall, though, I think you take away a sense of, of some of the downside risks to economic activity having, having been diminished, with the NIPA revisions in particular, and so, overall, feeling, feeling good about economic activity. So I think we would factor that in. At the same time, we got one inflation report, which was—it wasn’t terrible, but it was— it was a little higher than expected. So I think, really, the question is, is December. And, you know, by December we’ll have—we’ll have more data: I guess one more employment report, two more inflation reports, and lots of other data, and, you know, we’ll make a decision as we get to December. . You know, I can’t. We don’t fill out a—we don’t fill out an SEP, and I can’t characterize one that wasn’t filled out today. So I can’t really speak for kind of exactly where the—where the Committee is. I would just say, for December, we’re going to be—again, in every meeting—we’re going to be looking at the incoming data and how that affects the outlook. As you know, we’re in the process of recalibrating from a fairly restrictive level at 5.33 percent. After today’s move, we’re down 75 basis points. And we’re, we’re asking ourselves, “Is that where we need to be?” You know that we’re, we’re trying to steer between the risk of moving too quickly and perhaps undermining our progress on inflation or moving too slowly and allowing the labor market to weaken too much. We’re trying to, to be on a middle path where we can maintain the strength in the labor market while also enabling further progress on inflation. We think that’s where we are, but that’s the question we’re going to be asking in September and, and in other meetings. And, again, I can’t really update you on the Committee’s thinking, because we don’t fill out an SEP at this meeting. . Again, I’m going to wait—we’re going to wait and see how things come in in December. I mean, I—it’s just—I would put it this way: We’re on a path to a more neutral stance. And, and that’s very much what we’re on. That has not changed at all since September. And, you know, we’re just going to have to see where the—where the data lead us. We have, you know, a whole six weeks of data to look at to make that decision in December. Obviously, I’m not ruling it out or in, but, but, you know, I would say—you know, I would say that, you know, again, we didn’t update the SEP, so I’m not going to characterize, you know, where the Committee would be. . Not really, no. So let me tell you what we were thinking. So the test of gaining further confidence was a—was our test for the first rate cut, right? And so we, we met that test in September, and therefore we take that test out. If you leave it in, then it’s new forward guidance. It’s brand new forward guidance. “What do you mean by it? Are you—are you making—are you requiring yet further guidance?” We have to say “yes” or “no” at every meeting whether we’ve made further progress. The point is we have gained confidence that, that we’re on a sustainable path down to 2 percent. So that, I would tell you, is, is what that’s really all about. And it’s not meant to send a signal. Neither of those is meant to send a further signal. And, you know, saying “further progress” it becomes a test where we don’t want to be—we don’t think it’s a good time to be doing a lot of, of forward guidance. You know, we’re—there’s a fair amount of uncertainty in that—in what I’ve said. The path that we’re on, we do know what—where the destination is, but we don’t know the right pace, and we don’t know exactly where the destination is. So the—the—the point is to find that, to find the right pace and the right destination as we go. And I think there’s a fair amount of uncertainty about that, and, you know, you don’t want to tie yourself up with, with guidance. You want to be able to make sensible decisions as you go. . So we don’t comment on fiscal policy, and, again, I don’t have a lot more to say on, on what’s driving bond yields. In terms of, of policy changes, though, let me give you a sense of how this, this works in the ordinary case. Let’s say Congress is considering a rewrite of the tax laws  it doesn’t matter what’s in the content. So we would follow that. At a certain point, we’d, we’d think we see the outline, so we’d start to model it. And then we’d wait, and we’d wait, and, at a certain point, the staff would brief the FOMC and say, you know, “This is—these are the likely effects.” There’s lots and lots of literature on the effects of tax policy changes on various parts of the economy. So we’d, we’d try to get smart on that. And then the law actually passes, and, you know, you’d start to put it—you’d probably run an alternative simulation before that happens, just to keep people trying to understand it. Then, then when it actually passes, it goes into the model, along with a million other things. So, you know, these—we have a very large economy. Many things are affecting it at any given time. And, you know, a law change of some kind would go in there, but—it would go in, but it would—you know, it’s a process that takes some time. Clearly, the legislative process takes a lot of time. And, of course, the real question is not the effect of that law. It’s all of the policy changes that are happening. What’s the net effect and, you know, the overall effect on the economy at any given time? So I think that’s a—that’s a process that takes a lot of time and that we go through all the time with every Administration, constantly. And I just—this will be no different. But, you know, right now, we’re—there’s nothing to—there’s nothing to model right now. It’s such an early stage. We don’t know what the policies are, and once we know what they are, we won’t—we won’t have a sense of, you know, when they’ll be implemented or, or all those sorts of things. So I think I would just say— . —we’re not doing that now, and all that will take time, and it will be very much regular order when we do do that. . I—look, I just think—the first question is, how long will they be sustained? If you remember the 5 percent 10 year, people were drawing massively important conclusions only to find, you know, three weeks later that the 10 year was 50 basis points lower. So, you know, it’s material changes and financial conditions that last, that are persistent, that really matter. And we don’t know that about these. What we’ve seen so far? You know, we’re watching it. We’re reading. You know, we’re doing the decompositions and reading others, but right now it’s not a major factor in, in how we’re thinking about things. . So you’re right. As I mentioned, and as you mentioned, the latest economic data have been strong, and that’s, of course, a great thing and highly welcome. But, of course, our mandate is maximum for employment and price stability, and we think that even with today’s cut, policy is still restrictive. We understand it’s not possible to say precisely how restrictive, but we feel that it is still restrictive. And if you look at our goal variables, the labor market has cooled a great deal from its overheated state of two years ago and is now essentially in balance. It is continuing to cool, albeit at a—at a modest rate, and we don’t need further cooling, we don’t think, to achieve our inflation mandate. So that’s the labor market. Inflation has moved down a great deal from its higher—its highs of two years ago, and we judged, as I mentioned, that it’s on a sustainable path back to 2 percent. So the job’s not done on inflation. But if you look at those two things, we judged in September that it was appropriate to begin to recalibrate our policy stance to reflect this progress, and today’s decision is really another step in that process. Overall, as I mentioned, we believe that with an appropriate recalibration of our policy stance, we can maintain strength in the labor market even as our policy stance enables further progress toward our inflation goal. . So we haven’t, you know, made any decision like that at all. But we’re—so we’re in the process, as I mentioned, of moving policy down—our stance down over time to a more neutral level. And, as a general matter, as we move ahead, we are prepared to adjust our assessments of the appropriate pace and destination as the outlook evolves. So, for example, if we were to see the labor market deteriorating, we’d be prepared to move more quickly. Alternatively, as we approach levels that are plausibly neutral or close to neutral, it may turn out to be appropriate to slow the pace at which we’re dialing back restriction. Again, haven’t made any decisions about that, but that’s certainly a possibility. If you— you can think of it as similar to what we do with asset purchase—with asset runoff with QT. So we reach a point where we slow the pace, much like an airplane reaching the airport slows down. And so, you know, it—we’re thinking about it that way, but it’s, it’s something that we’re just beginning to think about. . Well, so I think if you look at the 3  and 6 month—you’re quoting the 12 month. . So we look at all of them, right? . But if you look at three  and six month core PCE, you’ll see they’re around 2.3 percent. So we look at all of them. And we look at—we also—we look at 12 as well. But what it’s telling us is that we really have made significant progress. And we expect there to be bumps. For example, you know, the, the last three months of last year, the core PCE readings were very, very low—probably unsustainably low. So that’s why you see—that’s why forecasts generally see a couple of upticks toward the end of the year. On the other hand, the January reading certainly looks like an example of residual seasonality, so that we saw last year. So when that falls out of the 12 month calculation in February, we should see it staying down. So there will literally be a bump up and then down. We understand that. Overall, you see the progress on inflation, and you also look at the economy, and you say, “What’s—what is the inflation story now? Where is it coming from?” So I point to a couple of things. One is the nonhousing services and goods, which together make up 80 percent of that— of the core PCE index, are back to the levels they were at the last time we had sustained 2 percent inflation, which happens to be in the early 2000s for a period of five, six, seven years. So they’re back at that level. What’s not is housing services. So let’s talk about housing services. Housing services is higher. What’s going on there is, you know, market rents, newly signed leases, are experiencing very low inflation. And what’s happening is older, you know, leases that are turning over are taking several years to catch up to where market, market leases are—market rent leases are. So that’s just a catch up problem. It’s not really reflecting current inflationary pressures  it’s reflecting past inflationary pressures. So that’s, that’s one thing. The other thing is, I’d say look at the labor market—not a source of inflationary pressures. Where is it coming from? It’s not a very tight economy. What is the story about inflation? You see that catch up inflation also in insurance and in several other areas. So you’re seeing—we’re not, not declaring victory, obviously, but we feel like the story is very consistent with inflation continuing to come down on a bumpy path over the next couple of years and settling around 2 percent. That story is intact, and it won’t be one or two really good data months, or bad data months aren’t going to really change the pattern at this point, now that we’re this far into the process. . Nothing in the economic data suggests that the Committee has any need to be in a hurry to get there. We are seeing strong economic activity. We are seeing ongoing strength in the labor market  we’re watching that carefully, but we do see maintaining strength there. And so we think that the right way—the right way to find neutral, if you will, is carefully, patiently. Again, that’s not meant to have a specific meaning other than we—to the extent—to the extent the economy remains strong, we have the ability to, to take advantage of that as we try to navigate that middle path between the two risks. . Sure. So on your first question, I’m not going to talk about anything that relates directly or indirectly to the election. On the second one, you’re—you know, this is the great question, and it’s the one we think about all the time. So I’ll just say a couple things. You know, there’s nothing really surprising here. What we know is that the unemployment rate is low. We also know that it’s come down significantly—sorry, moved up significantly from a year or so ago. So we’ve seen a big change upward in unemployment. Sometimes that has meant bad things. So far, it doesn’t appear to be. It appears that the—I wouldn’t say that the labor market has fully stabilized, because I do think it’s continuing to very gradually cool, but it seems to be in a good place. And our policy, of course, is designed to keep it in that good place, to maintain the strength in the labor market, while also enabling further progress on inflation. You know, you mentioned a bunch of, of indicators, and you’re right. You know, the, the openings to unemployment rate is back to a normal level. I would—I would characterize it more broadly as “normalizing.” You mentioned wages. Wages are still running just a bit above where they would need to be to be consistent with 2 percent inflation, unless productivity is going to remain at this high level. If we see the—if we see productivity, you know, more sustainably at these high levels, then that would sustain higher wage gains. So I would say—in fact, you can say it the other way, that, that wage increases are now consistent with 2 percent inflation given current productivity readings. But, of course, you know, the lore on productivity readings is whenever you see high readings, you should assume they’re going to revert pretty quickly to the longer term trend. That has always been the case for 50 years. But, you know, it may be that—we’re now five years. If you look at the NIPA revisions that came out a month ago, we’re five years into, into a nice set of productivity readings, which are sustained and very healthy. But, overall, it’s a good labor market. We could talk about 20 different data series. We’ll be looking at all of them, of course. But, you know, we don’t want the labor market to, to soften much from here. We don’t think we need that to happen to get inflation back to 2 percent. . No. . No. . So it’s hard to characterize a, you know, really interesting set of discussions we had, and, of course, you’ll see them in the minutes in three weeks. But I would say this. I think, you know, the comments from our Reserve Bank colleagues and from the CEOs that they talk to are pretty constructive on the economy right now—pretty constructive, feeling that the labor market is, is, you know, back to normal to the point where it’s no longer that much of a discussion topic in their world, whereas two years ago, it was all they were talking about. So they feel like the labor market’s in balance. People feel good about where the economy is. Demand is obviously pretty strong. And, you know, you’re seeing, what, 2.8 percent growth in the third quarter estimated. Maybe the year is 2½. This is—this is—you know, this is a strong economy. It’s actually remarkable how well the U.S. economy has been performing with, you know, strong growth, a strong labor market, inflation coming down. We’re, you know, really performing better than any of our global peers. And I think that is reflected in what you hear from—what I hear people hear from CEOs. I don’t get to talk to a lot of CEOs in my job, but I hear what others summarize from those. And, of course, I hear the Reserve Bank presidents do a lot of that, and it’s pretty constructive overall. Now, that’s not to say—there are areas of caution and things like that but, ultimately, overall pretty positive. . I think it’s—you know, it’s things like—clearly, geopolitical risks around the world are elevated, and just as clearly, they’ve had relatively little effect on the U.S. economy. Now, that can change through the price of oil or otherwise, but people talk about those as, you know, something that’s on the horizon all the time. But, you know, ultimately, if you look at the U.S. economy, its, its performance has been very good. And that’s, that’s what we hear from businesspeople, an expectation that that will continue. If anything, people feel next year—I’ve heard this from several people—that next year could even be stronger than this year. . So, you know, I have said many times no more, no less than what the predecessors you mentioned have said. And what that is is that the U.S. fiscal—federal government’s fiscal path—fiscal policy is on an unsustainable path. The level of our debt relative to the economy is not unsustainable. The path is unsustainable. And we see that. And, you know, you’ve got a very large deficit at—you’re at full employment, and that’s expected to continue. So it’s important that we—you know, that that be dealt with. It is ultimately a threat to the economy. Now, I can say that. I don’t have oversight. We don’t have oversight over fiscal policy. I’ve said it on many occasions—just said it again. . Not permitted under the law. . Not permitted under the law. . No. I was not referring to, to the new Administration’s policies at all, nor will I today. So I—what I’m just saying is, as we look ahead, we know—and I mentioned this in my statement—that the risks are two sided. I guess I should start by saying that we think that the economy and we think our policy are both in a very good place, a very good place. And—but as you look forward, you say, “What are the risks?” And one risk is that we would move too quickly and find ourselves having moved too quickly, and inflation comes back, and we—and we lost our chance to get inflation back to 2 percent. So we have to avoid that risk. And that, that—to avoid that risk, that means you want to move carefully. The other risk is that we move too slowly and that we allow the labor market to weaken too much and do unnecessary damage to the labor market and to people’s working lives. That, that says, “Don’t get behind the curve.” So these are two—these two things are the two risks that we have to manage. And so we’re, we’re in the middle there. We try to be in the middle and deal with both of the—manage both of those. Again, the idea is to maintain support, the strength that we have in the labor market and in the economy, but also with somewhat less restrictive but still restrictive policy, enable further progress toward our 2 percent inflation goal. And so there’s—you know, there— this is the thing: Meeting by meeting, we’re going to be making our assessment of what the right path is. You know, it’s not as important—the precise timing of these things is not as important as the overall arc of them, and the arc of them is to move from where we are now to a sense of neutral, a more neutral policy. We don’t know exactly where that is  we only know it by its works. We’re pretty sure it’s below where we are now. But as we move further, there will be more uncertainty about where that is. And we’re going to move carefully as, as this goes on so that, you know, we can increase the chances that we will get it right. . So we, we would be concerned if we saw—if we thought we saw longer term inflation expectations anchoring at a higher level. That’s not what we’re seeing. We’re still seeing between surveys and market readings broadly consistent with—you know, I, I looked at the five year, five year earlier today, and it’s probably moved, but it’s just not—it’s just—it’s kind of right where it’s been, and also it’s pretty close to consistent with 2 percent PCE inflation. So that’s one that’s been a traditional one that we look at a lot. But, overall, expectations seem to be—and really have throughout this—in a place that’s consistent with 2 percent inflation. But you’re right to say we watch that very carefully, and we will not allow inflation expectations to drift upward. But that’s, that’s really why we reacted so sharply back in 2022 was, was to avoid that. . So you’re right that, you know, we say that the economy is performing well, and it is, but we also know that people are still feeling the effects of high prices, for example. And we went through—the world went through a global inflation shock, and inflation went up everywhere. And, you know, it, it stays with you because the price level doesn’t come back down. So what that takes is it takes some years of real wage gains for people to feel better. And that’s what we’re—that’s what we’re trying to create. And I think we’re well on the road to creating that. Inflation has come way down. The economy is still strong here. Wages are moving up but, but at a sustainable level. So it’s just—I think—I think what needs to happen is happening and, for the most part, has happened. But it’ll be some time before people, you know, regain their confidence and feel that. And, you know, we don’t tell people how to—how to feel about the economy. We respect—completely respect—what they’re feeling. Those feelings are true  they’re accurate. We don’t question them. We—you know, we respect them. KELLY O’GRADY. And just a quick follow up—President elect Trump has been critical of your performance. Any concern about his influence on the Fed’s independence? . I’m not going—I’m not going to get into the—any of the political things here today, but thank you. . So that’s a—you know, the whole plan is not to have stagflation, so we don’t have to deal with it. So that’s our—that is actually our plan. [Laughter] You know, it’s, of course, a very difficult thing because you’re—you know, you’re—anything you do with interest rates will, will hurt one side or the other, either the inflation mandate or the—or the employment mandate. I would just say that, you know, we’ve, we’ve been able to see inflation come down a whole lot, you know, much closer to our goal without the kind of sharp increase in unemployment that has often accompanied programs of disinflation. So knock on wood, we’ve gotten this far without seeing a real weakening in, in the labor market. And we believe we can complete the inflation task while also keeping the labor market strong, and that, of course, is exactly what we’re trying to do. . I—no. I wouldn’t rule anything out or in that far away. But that’s certainly not, not our plan. I mean, our baseline expectation is that we’ll continue to move gradually down towards neutral, that the economy will continue to grow at a healthy clip, and that the labor market will remain strong. If you look at our—look at our—that will not change from the September SEP. You know, that is our baseline forecast. And, short of some exogenous event, it will—that will continue to be our forecast for the foreseeable future. So— but, ultimately, you know, it’s—we’re not in a—we’re not in a world where we can afford to rule, rule things out a full year in advance. It’s—there’s just too much uncertainty in what we do. . No. That’s, that’s not the way our framework works. We’re aiming for inflation at, at 2 percent. We’re—we do not have—we do not think it would be appropriate to deliberately undershoot. And, you know, part of the problem there is that low inflation can be a problem, too, in a way. But that’s not part of our framework, and it’s not something we’re going to be—going to be looking at in our framework review. Thank you very much.

****FOMCpresconf20241218

. Good afternoon. My colleagues and I remain squarely focused on achieving our dual mandate goals of maximum employment and stable prices for the benefit of the American people. The economy is strong overall and has made significant progress toward our, our goals over the past two years. The labor market has cooled from its formerly overheated state and remains solid. Inflation has moved much closer to our 2 percent longer run goal. We’re committed to maintaining our economy’s strength by supporting maximum employment and returning inflation to our 2 percent goal. To that end, today, the Federal Open Market Committee decided to take another step in reducing the degree of policy restraint by lowering our policy interest rate by ¼ percentage point. We also decided to continue to reduce our securities holdings. I’ll have more to say about monetary policy after briefly reviewing economic developments. Recent indicators suggest that economic activity has continued to expand at a—at a solid pace. GDP rose at an annual rate of 2.8 percent in the third quarter, about the same pace as in the second quarter. Growth of consumer spending has remained resilient, and investment in equipment and intangibles has strengthened. In contrast, activity in the housing sector has been weak. Overall, improving supply conditions have supported the strong performance of the U.S. economy over the past year. In our Summary of Economic Projections, Committee participants generally expect GDP growth to remain solid, with a median projection of about 2 percent over the next few years. In the labor market, conditions remain solid. Payroll job gains have slowed from earlier in the year, averaging 173,000 per month over the past three months. The unemployment rate is higher than it was a year ago, but, at 4.2 percent in November, it has remained low. Nominal wage growth has eased over the past year, and the jobs to workers gap has narrowed. Overall, a broad set of indicators suggests that conditions in the labor market are now less tight than in 2019. The labor market is not a source of significant inflationary pressures. The median projection for the unemployment rate in the SEP is 4.2 percent at the end of this year and 4.3 percent over the next few years. Inflation has eased significantly over the past two years but remains somewhat elevated relative to our 2 percent longer run goal. Estimates based on the consumer price index and other data indicate that total PCE prices rose 2.5 percent over the 12 months ending in November, and that, excluding the volatile food and energy categories, core PCE prices rose 2.8 percent. Longer term inflation expectations appear to remain well anchored, as reflected in a broad range of surveys of households, businesses, and forecasters, as well as measures from financial markets. The median projection in the SEP for total PCE inflation is 2.4 percent this year and 2.5 percent next year, somewhat higher than projected in September. Thereafter, the median projection falls to our 2 percent objective. Our monetary policy actions are guided by our dual mandate to promote maximum employment and stable prices for the American people. We see the risks to achieving our employment and inflation goals as being roughly in balance, and we are attentive to the risks on both sides of our mandate. At today’s meeting, the Committee decided to lower the target range for the federal funds rate by ¼ percentage point, to 4¼ 4½ percent. We’ve been moving policy toward a more neutral setting in order to maintain the strength of the economy and the labor market while establishing further progress in—sorry, enabling further progress on—inflation. With today’s action, we have lowered our policy rate by a full percentage point from its peak, and our policy stance is now significantly less restrictive. We can therefore be more cautious as we consider further adjustments to our policy rate. We know that reducing policy restraint too fast or too much could hinder progress on inflation. At the same time, reducing policy restraint too slowly or too little could unduly weaken economic activity and employment. In considering the extent and timing of additional adjustments to the target range for the federal funds rate, the Committee will assess incoming data, the evolving outlook, and the balance of risks. We’re not on any preset course. In our Summary of Economic Projections, FOMC participants wrote down their individual assessments of an appropriate path for the federal funds rate, based on what each participant judges to be the most likely scenario going forward. The median participant projects that the appropriate level of the federal funds rate will be 3.9 percent at the end of next year and 3.4 percent at the end of 2026. These median projections are somewhat higher than in September, consistent with the firmer inflation projection. These projections, however, are not a Committee plan or decision. As the economy evolves, monetary policy will adjust in order to best promote our maximum employment and price stability goals. If the economy remains strong and inflation does not continue to move sustainably toward 2 percent, we can dial back policy restraint more slowly. If the labor market were to weaken unexpectedly or inflation were to fall more quickly than anticipated, we can ease policy more quickly. Policy is well positioned to deal with the risks and uncertainties that we face in pursuing both sides of our dual mandate. On a technical note: We lowered the offering rate on our overnight reverse repo facility to align it with the bottom of the target range for the federal funds rate—its typical configuration. Technical adjustments of this kind have no bearing on the stance of monetary policy. The Fed has been assigned two goals for monetary policy: maximum employment and stable prices. We remain committed to supporting maximum employment, bringing inflation sustainably to our 2 percent goal, and keeping longer term inflation expectations well anchored. Our success in delivering on these goals matters to all Americans. We understand that our actions affect communities, families, and businesses across the country. Everything we do is in service to our public mission. We at the Fed will do everything we can to achieve our maximum employment and price stability goals. Thank you, and I look forward to your questions. . Well, so let, let me start by saying why we—why we cut today and then—and then move to 2025. So I would say today was a—was a closer call, but we decided it was the right call because we thought it was the best decision to foster achievement of both of our goals, maximum employment and price stability. We see the risks as two sided: moving too slowly and needlessly undermine economic activity and the labor market, or move too quickly and needlessly undermine our progress on inflation. So we’re trying to steer between those two risks, and, on balance, we decided to go ahead with a further cut. And I, I’ll give you some details on why. Downside risks to the labor market do appear to have diminished, but the labor market is now looser than pre pandemic, and it’s clearly still cooling further, so far in, in a gradual and orderly way. We don’t think we need further cooling in the labor market to get inflation down to 2 percent. Job creation is now well below the level or certainly below the level that would hold unemployment constant, the job finding rate is low and declining, and other measures—such as surveys of workers and businesses, quits, things like that—broadly show a, a much cooler labor market than there was, than we had in 2019. It’s still quite gradually cooling. So we, we keep an eye on that. Inflation, we see that story as still broadly on track, and, and I’ll tell you why. We, we’ve made a great deal of progress. Twelve month core inflation, as I mentioned, through November is estimated at 2.8 percent, down from a high of 5.6 percent. Twelve—but 12 month inflation has actually been moving sideways, as we are “lapping” very low readings of late last year. Housing services inflation actually is steadily coming down now, albeit at a slower pace than we might like, but it has now come down substantially and it is making progress, slower than hoped. And we, we’ve had recent high readings from nonmarket services and some bumpiness for goods. So I’ll just say, we, we—so remember that we couple this decision today with the “extent and timing” language in the postmeeting statement that signals that we are at or near a point at which it will be appropriate to slow the pace of further adjustments. You ask about 2025. I, I think that the lower—the slower pace of cuts for next year really reflects both the higher inflation readings we’ve had this year and the expectation that inflation will be higher. You saw in the SEP that risks and, and uncertainty around inflation we see as higher. Nonetheless, we, we see ourselves as, as still on track to continue to cut. I think the actual cuts that we make next year will not be because of anything we wrote down today. We’re, we’re going to react to data. That’s just the general sense of what the Committee thinks is likely to be appropriate. . So we’re—to, to cut further after this point, I, I would say it this way: We’ve reduced our policy rate now by 100 basis points. We’re significantly closer to neutral. At 4.3 percent and “change,” we believe policy is still meaningfully restrictive. But as for additional cuts, we’re going to be looking for further progress on inflation as well as continued strength in the labor market. And as long as the economy and the labor market are solid, we can be cautious about—as we consider further cuts. And all of that is reflected—to your question—in the December SEP, which shows a median forecast of down [to] two cuts next year, compared to four in September. . I, I’d say—I’d, I’d point to five or six things, and, and I’d start—let me start by saying that we think the economy’s in a really good place, and we think policy’s in a really good place. Let’s remember that the economy’s growing 2½ percent this year, that inflation has come down by 50 percent to, to—from 5.6 percent to 2.6 percent. Headline inflation is 2.5 percent on a 12 month basis. We’re actually in a really good starting place here. But since, you know—so, so what’s really driving the, the slower rate cut path? First thing is growth is stronger, right? We, the economy grew faster in the second half of 2024, so far, than we had expected and is expected to be above what our expectations in September next year as well. Unemployment is lower, and, you know, in the SEP, you’ll see that participants think that the—that the downside risks are less and uncertainty is less. And so that’s, that’s more strength, right? Inflation is higher, as we talked about. Inflation’s higher this year. It’s also higher in the forecast next year. I’d also point out that we’re, we’re closer to the neutral rate, which is another reason to be cautious about, about further moves. And—but then getting to your—to your point, there’s also, there’s uncertainty—uncertainty around inflation, I pointed out, is actually higher. It’s also—it’s also, in the case of some people, some people—the way I’d say it is this: Some people did take a very preliminary step and start to incorporate highly conditional estimates of economic effects of policies into their forecast at this meeting and said so in the meeting. Some people said they didn’t do so, and some people didn’t, didn’t say whether they did or not. So we have people making a bunch of different approaches to that. But some did identify policy uncertainty as one of the reasons for their, their writing down more uncertainty around inflation. And, you know, the point of that uncertainty is, it’s kind of commonsense thinking that when the path is uncertain you go a little bit slower. It’s not unlike driving on a foggy night or walking into a dark room full of furniture. You just slow down. And so that may have affected some of the people. But as, as I said, there’s a range of—range of approaches on the Committee. . Actually, that’s not the only thing that’s happened. What’s happened is that our forecast for inflation for this year, I think, are five tenths higher than they were in September. So, you’ve got—you had two months of higher inflation, September and October. As I mentioned, November is, is back on track. But, you know, once again we’ve, you know, we’ve had a year end projection for inflation and it’s kind of fallen apart as we’ve approached the end of the year. So that is certainly a large factor in people’s thinking. I can tell you that might be the single biggest factor is inflation has once again underperformed relative to expectations. It’s still, you know, going to be between 2½ and 3 [percent]. It’s way below where it was. But, you know, we really want to see progress on inflation, to, to, you know, as I mentioned, as we think about further cuts, we’re going to be looking for progress on inflation. We have been moving sideways on 12 month inflation as the 12 month window moves. That’s in part because inflation was very, very low measured in, in the 4th quarter of 2023. Nonetheless, as we go forward, we’re going to want to be seeing further progress on bringing inflation down and keeping a solid labor market. . So I do think that the 2018, the September 2018 Tealbook alternative simulations are a good place to start. I happened to have brought them here with me today. I’m sure you have them too. They’re, they’re a good starting point, and, and I would just say, you know, it’s six years old analysis. But nonetheless, this is still, I think, I think the right, the right questions to ask. And, you know, there, there were two simulations: one was—one was “seeing through,” one was not. And I point you to, you’ll— there’s some language in the—in the “see  through” paragraph. It says, you know, it considers situations in which it might be appropriate to “see through” inflation and then, and then names some conditions that in, in which it might not be. In any case, this is not a question that’s in front of us right now. We, we won’t face that question—we don’t know when we’ll face that question. What the Committee’s doing now is, is discussing pathways and understanding, again, the ways in which tariff driven inflation can affect—tariffs can affect inflation and the economy, and, and how to think about that. So, we’re, we’re—we’ve done a bit of, good bit of work, all of us have, each of us has, and, you know, it puts us in position, when we finally do see what the, what the actual policies are, to be, to make, you know, a more, more careful, thoughtful assessment of what might be the appropriate policy response. . So the, the main thing is—and this is also a point in these alternative simulations—is that there’re just many, many factors that go into what, what—how much tariffs will, will even go into consumer inflation. How persistent will that be? And, you know, so, we just—we just don’t know, really, very much at all about the actual policies, so it’s very premature to try to make any kind of conclusion. We don’t know what’ll be tariffed, from what countries, for how long, and what size. We don’t know whether there’ll be, you know, retaliatory tariffs. We don’t know what the, you know, the transmission of any of that will be into consumer prices. To your—to your point as well, I don’t—I wouldn’t say that we know whether the last episode is or is not a good model for what happened. You pointed out we’ve just been through a period of high inflation. We’ve just gotten through that period. That’s a difference. It was also quite a bit of diversion of trade away from China to other countries, since that, that may—that may have affects. I don’t know. I just think we, we need to take our time, not rush, and make a very careful assessment, but only when we’ve actually seen what the policies are and how they’re implemented. And, you know, we’re just—we’re just not at that stage. We’re at the stage of doing what other forecasters are doing—which is kind of thinking about these questions, but not, not trying to get to definitive answers for some time. . Let me—let me find these numbers. So we have—we have inflation coming down, core inflation coming down to 2½ [percent] next year. That’s, that’d be—that’d be significant progress. You see a slower path. I think that does take on board that we want to see real progress. But we, we, you know, we’d be seeing meaningful progress to get inflation down to that level. That wouldn’t be all the way to 2 percent, but that would be, it would be, you know, better than this year. This year, [it] will be 2.8 or 2.9. That would be meaningful. We, we also have to think about the, the, you know, the labor market. And while we, we have the labor market forecast as being in good shape, we are also mindful that it is still out there very gradually cooling, so far in an orderly, gradual way. But it’s also something we need to keep our eye on. . So that’s, that’s not the—that’s not any decision that we’ve made at all. Let me explain “extent and timing.” So the, the sense of that wording is to make clear that if the economy does evolve about as anticipated, we’re at a point at which it would be appropriate to slow the pace of rate cuts. So “extent,” that just relates to how, how much further we can reduce our policy rate consistent with getting to a neutral stance. Clearly, that distance has shrunk by 100 basis points. So it’s significantly smaller. So that’s, that’s the “extent” question. And, again, we’re going to be looking for further progress on inflation, as well as a strong labor market, to make those cuts. “Timing” just suggests, again, that we’re at a place where we, we, assuming the economy develops as expected, we’re at or near a level that will make it appropriate to slow the pace of adjustments. So that, that’s what we mean by that. We’re not trying to make decisions about the longer run. You know, we are, we’re trying to make sensible policy as we go. And, you know, I just would emphasize the uncertainty, which is, it’s just—it’s just a function of the fact that, that we expect significant policy changes. There’s nothing really unusual about that. I think we need to, we need to see what they are and see what the effects they will have. We’ll, we’ll have a much clearer picture, I think, you know, when that happens. . So the, the risks that you—sorry, the rates that you talked about are, are really longer run rates, and they’re affected, they are affected to some extent by Fed policy, but they’re also affected by many other things. And longer rates have actually gone up quite a bit since September, as, as you well know, and those are the things that drive, for example, mortgage rates more than short term rates do. So we look at that, but we look at all financial conditions, and then we look at what’s happening in the economy. So what we see happening in the economy, again, is, you know, most forecasters have been calling for a slowdown in growth for a very long time, and it keeps not happening. So we have—we’re now well into another year of growth. It looks like it might be 2½ percent. Third and—second and third quarters were right about at the same level. So the U.S. economy is just performing very, very well. Substantially better than our global peer group. And I, I—there’s no reason to think a downturn is, is any more likely than it—than it usually is. So, the outlook is pretty bright for our economy. We have to stay on task, though, and continue to have restrictive policies so that we can get inflation down to 2 percent. We’re also going to be looking out for the labor market. We want to keep the labor market pretty close to where it is. We’re pretty close to estimates of the, the natural rate of unemployment. Job creation is, is a little below the, the level that would keep it there but, nonetheless, close. And so that’s what our policy’s trying to achieve. . So confidence was our test for raising rates, and, you know, we’ve made—look, look at the broader suite: We’ve made just a great deal of progress. We’re, you know, we’re well into the 2’s in, in core inflation and around 2½ [percent]—or even lower than that, we have been—for headline inflation. So I, I would say I’m confident that inflation has come down a great deal, and I, I’m confident in the story about why it’s come down and why that portends well. And I’ll—and I’ll tell you why. You, again, you do see with housing services inflation, which is one that we’ve really worried, worried about, it really has come down now quite steadily, at a slower pace than we thought, you know, two years ago, but it’s nonetheless steadily coming down as, as market rents, you know, market rents start to equilibrate better with, you know, new leases that turn over. Not, not new tenants, but new leases. Market rents is new leases. So that, that’s happening  that process is ongoing pretty much as we expect. Goods inflation, which is another big piece of it, has returned right to the range where it was before the pandemic. Just for some months this year it kind of moved up in a bumpy way because of used cars and things like that. But we think, overall, that should generally be in the range it was in. Then that leaves nonhousing services, and market based nonhousing services are in, in good shape. It’s nonmarket services, and those are—those are services that are imputed rather than measured directly, and they, they don’t, we, we think they don’t really tell us much about the, you know, about tightness in the economy. They don’t really reflect that. I mean, a good example is financial services, which is really done off of asset prices, and that just—so that, that’s how that inflation works. So the overall picture, the story of why inflation should be coming down, is still intact. In particular, the labor market—look at the labor market. It’s, it is cooler by so many measures now—modestly cooler than it was in 2019, a year when inflation was well under 2 percent. So it’s not a source of inflationary pressures. Not to say there aren’t regional and, and, you know, particular professions where labor is tight. But, overall, you’re not getting inflationary impulses of any significance from the labor market. So what’s the story? The story is still just, we’re unwinding from these large shocks that the economy got in 2021 and ’22 in, for example, housing services, and now also in, in insurance, in particular, where costs went up, and those are now being reflected later in housing insurance. It’s real inflation, but it doesn’t portend persistently high inflation. So we and most other forecasters still feel that we’re on track to, you know, to get down to 2 percent. It might take another year or two from here, but I, I’m confident that that’s the path we’re on. And, you know, our policy will do everything it can to assure that that is the case. . The, the unemployment rate has now—is now the same as it was in July: 4.2 percent. It’s moved up and down, but it’s now the same as July. And job creation is, is lower than it has been, but it’s been—it’s been steady—it’s not—it’s not declining. It’s been steady at a level which, as I pointed out a couple times, is actually below the level that would hold the unemployment rate constant, but it’s not so far below. So, you might—you might—if, if we have the, the breakeven level right, and if jobs continue—job creation continues at that level in the establishment survey, then you would get a tenth maybe every other month kind of thing. So gradually declining. But we don’t have that kind of precision in this. So, but you’re right, though, and I, I read out some of the reasons. We, we do think the labor market is still cooling by many measures, and we’re watching that closely. It’s, it’s not cooling in a—in a quick or in a way that really raises concerns. I think, you know, you pointed out participants in the FOMC really thought that the risks and uncertainty had improved relative to the labor market. And it’s because of, because things have just gotten a little bit better, it doesn’t—the unemployment rate flat and things like that. Nonetheless, you know, we’re watching it closely. . So I—what I said is, we don’t think we need further softening to get to 2 percent inflation. That’s what I’m saying, not that it’s not welcome. We don’t need it, we don’t think. If, if you had a situation where inflation’s moving around by a tenth every few months, that’s, you know, we’d have to weigh that against the fact that inflation has in recent months been moving sideways in the 12 month window. And so we’ve got to weigh them both, at this point. You know, for a while there we were only really focused mainly, mainly focused on, on inflation. We’ve now gotten to a place where, where the risks of the two are what we think are broadly, roughly in balance. And so that’s how we think about it. . We’re not—we’re not renaming the phase—yet. But we may get around to that. But, no, I, I would say we, we are, though, in, in a new phase in the process, as I said. So, and that’s just because we’ve reduced—we’ve reduced our policy rate by 100 basis points. We’re significantly closer to neutral. We still think where we are is meaningfully, meaningfully restrictive, and I think from this point forward, you know, it’s appropriate to move cautiously and look for progress on inflation. We’ve, you know, we’ve done a lot to support economic activity by cutting 100 basis points, and that’s a good thing. I, I think it would—I support the decision, and, and I think it was the right decision to make. I think from now we are in a place where the risks really are in balance, and we need to see progress on inflation. And that’s, that’s how we’re thinking about it. So it is kind of a new thing. We moved pretty quickly to get to here, and I think going forward, obviously, we’re going to be moving slower, which is consistent with, with the SEP. . So we, yeah, we always try to be careful about not throwing out the numbers we don’t like, you know? It’s just a, an occupational hazard is, is to [say], “Look, those high months are wrong.” What about the low months? You know, we’ve got, we have a very low month, potentially, in November. You know, it’s estimated by many to be in the mid teens for core PCE. So that could be idiosyncratically low. We try to look—we try to look at not just a couple or three months. We shouldn’t have—our, our position shouldn’t change based on two or three months of good or bad data. We have a long string now of inflation coming down gradually over time. As I mentioned, 12 month, I think it’s 12 month headline’s 2½  12 month core is 2.8. That’s way better than we were. We still have some work to do, though, is how we’re looking at it. And we need policy to remain restrictive to, to get—to get that work done, we think. . So we, we do look carefully at financial conditions, of course  that’s part of what we do. But, you know, we, we really look carefully at is the performance of our— of our goal variables and, and how are we affecting the economy. So what we’ve seen over the course of—just take the last year. We, we’ve seen inflation—well, over the last couple of years—come down a lot. We’ve seen the labor market cool off quite a bit. That suggests that our policy is restrictive. We’ve, we can also look more directly at, at the parts of the economy that are affected by—that, that are interest sensitive, like particularly housing. Housing activity is, is very low, and that’s partly, significantly because of our policy. So we think our policy is working. It’s transmitting, and it’s having the effects on our goal variables that we would want. You know, a lot of things move financial conditions around, as you know, and we don’t really control those. But I’d say we, we see the effects we’re hoping to see on, on the goal variables and, and the places where we’d expect to see it. . So, you know, we, we’re not allowed to own Bitcoin. The Federal Reserve Act says what we can own, and we’re, we’re not looking for a, a law change. That’s the kind of thing for Congress to consider, but we are not looking for a law change at the Fed. . I think it’s pretty clear we’ve avoided a recession. I think growth this year has, has been solid, it really has. PDFP, private domestic final purchases, which, which we think is the best indicator of private demand, is looking to come in around 3 percent [real growth] this year. This is a really good number. Again, the U.S. economy has just been remarkable. And it’s—when we, in these international meetings that I attend, this has been the story, is that how well the U.S. is doing. And if you look around the world, there’s just a lot of slow growth and continued struggles with inflation. So I feel—I feel very good about where the economy is and the performance of the economy, and we want to keep that going. . I don’t think so, no. I think, overall, if you look at it, prime age participation is still very high. What, what’s going on in the labor market is that the hiring rate is low. So if you—if you have a job, you’re doing very well, and layoffs are very low, right? So people are not losing their jobs in large numbers, unusually large numbers. If you are looking for a job, though, the hiring rate is low, and that’s a signal of, of lower demand, and it has come down. So we look for signs like that, and that, that’s clearly a sign of softening, further softening. I didn’t mention it earlier, but I, I think you can see a, an ongoing gradual softening in the labor market. Again, not something we need to see to get 2 percent inflation. And, you know, that’s part of the reason that explains why we moved ahead today with, with our, with the action, with, with an additional cut. So, but you take a step back, the level of unemployment is very low—again, participation is high. Wages are at a healthy and, and ever more sustainable level—wage growth. And so the labor market—this is a good, a good labor market, and, you know, we want to keep it that way. . You know, we, we can’t know that with any tremendous certainty. I, I will say that we think that, that our policy balances the risks—we think the risks are roughly in balance as between the two mandates, and we think the labor market is, is in solid shape. And when I say it’s softening or cooling, it’s very gradual process. You know, job creations are, are meaningfully positive  wages are, you know, if anything, a little, still a bit above what would be sustainable if productivity were to revert to its longer run trend. If you, if you take into account the high productivity readings we’ve had, then wages are already at a sustainable level relative to 2 percent inflation. So, again, I, I don’t want to overstate the downside in the labor market, because the downsides clearly appear to have diminished. Nonetheless, it’s, it’s one of our mandate goals, and, you know, we pay close attention to it, and it’s, it’s worth noting that it is still gradually cooling—gradually and in an orderly way. And, and, you know, that’s, that’s how I would characterize it, and that’s why we’re paying careful attention. . You know, it, it breaks down into a long answer, if you want, but it just has been a little bit more stubborn. I think if you go back two or three years, many people were saying that to get this far down we would’ve had to have a, had a deep recession and, you know, high unemployment by now. Well, that has not been the case, so, you know, the, the path down has actually been much better than many predicted. We, we’ve managed to, to have the unemployment rate remain essentially at its longer run natural rate, while inflation has come down from—you know, core PCE inflation has come down from 5.6 percent to 2.8 percent on a 12 month basis. So that’s, that’s a pretty good outcome. Why hasn’t it come down [more]? One reason is that, that—just a technical issue around the way we calculate housing services, and that, that process has been slower than—market rents have, are showing up more slowly in that measure than we might have thought three, two, two years ago. So that’s part of it. I think there are other, other parts of the story, but, you know, the, the—what, what I think people are feeling right now is the effect of high prices, not high inflation. So we, we understand very well that prices went up by a great deal, and people really feel that. And it’s prices of food and transportation and heating your home and things like that. So there’s tremendous pain in, in that burst of inflation that was very global. This was everywhere in all the advanced economies at the same time. So now we have—inflation itself is way down, but people are still feeling high prices, and that is—that is really what people are feeling. The best we can do for them—and that’s who we work for—is to get inflation back down to its target and keep it there so that people are earning, you know, big, real wage increases so that their, their wages are going up, their, their compensation is going up faster than inflation year upon year upon year. And that’s what will restore people’s good feeling about the economy. That’s what it will take, and that’s what we’re aiming for. . I feel—I feel very good about where the economy is, and, honestly, I’m very optimistic about, about the economy, and it’s—we’re, we’re in a really good place  our policy’s in a really good place. I, I expect another good year next year. . So I’ll say a couple things. First of all, when we, when we write— the thing we write down in the Summary of Economic Projections is the longer run neutral rate, which is the neutral rate at a time when supply and demand are in balance, the full economy’s in balance, and no shocks are hitting the economy. That is not where we are right now. So when we’re making monetary policy at the Fed, that’s not the question we’re asking. So you can’t do a straight read between those longer run numbers that we write down and what we think the appropriate policy should be. So, basically, at any given time, various shocks are hitting the economy. And so what we’re doing in, in real time is we’re looking at our policy stance, and we’re looking at the way it’s hitting the economy, and, particularly, we look at the effects it’s having as we try to move the economy toward maximum employment and price stability. And the answer can be that there are things that affect the economy that are—that are lasting but not permanent. And the, the ones that are permanent are the ones that would be in r*. The ones that are, could be lasting, but, but nonetheless go away over time, they could actually affect what, what’s sort of technically the appropriate neutral stance in near term. So we’re looking at that, and, you know, we don’t—we don’t know exactly where it is, but as I like to say, we know it by its works, and I think what, what we know for sure is that we’re 100 basis points closer to it right now. There are many estimates of where that might be, and we know we’re a lot closer to it, and I think we’re in a good place. But I think from here it’s a new phase, and we’re going to be, you know, cautious about, about further cuts. . Yeah, I mean, honestly, we—you know, there are countless models of what—of what a neutral rate might be at any given time. There, there are empirical models, there are theoretical models, there are things that combine them, and they have as many different answers as you’d like. So there is no real certainty. And, I mean, it’s, it’s actually a good thing to know that we don’t know exactly where it is, so you’re not—you’re not tempted to think, “Oh, I think this model or this estimate is right.” You, you just have to be open to, you know, the empirical data that are coming in and also how it’s affecting the outlook. And it’s not made any easier by the fact that, you know, that our policy works with long and variable lags. Nonetheless, that is the job we have, and so we’re, we’re— I think we need— it’s appropriate for us—for us now to proceed cautiously, now that we’re 100 basis points closer to, to neutral, and we’ll do so. Meanwhile, the economy seems to be in, in good shape, and these cuts will certainly help to support economic activity and the labor market while we can still make progress on inflation, because policy is still meaningfully restrictive. . So, and as, as I imagine you know, the, you know, the goal overall is headline inflation, because that’s what people experience. People don’t experience core inflation  they experience inflation, and that includes food and energy costs. So that’s the overall goal. But, as we know, headline inflation contains energy and food, and those prices can fluctuate for reasons that are not related to tightness in the economy and therefore are not really good predictors of future inflation. So it turns out that core inflation is, is a better predictor of overall inflation than overall inflation is. So we look at core inflation because it’s a better measure of what future inflation is like to be, likely to be, because it’s a better measure of, of what inflation pressures exist. So that’s, that’s—it’s complicated, but ultimately, we, you know, our goal is headline, not core. So your question was, your second question was what? . So headline can be affected—you’re talking about next year. . Yeah, so headline can, again, it can be affected by energy prices and food prices. So that, there, there will be things in, in the headline forecasts that are to do with forecasts of energy prices, whereas core will be—if, if you look at core going out a full year, then it’ll be much more driven by things like tightness in the economy. So it—that, that’s why the two can go in different directions. Headline has been lower, as you know, most of this year, but that’s because energy prices have been coming down, which is a great thing for people. But energy prices will come down, and then they will go up, and it won’t really be telling us anything about how tight the economy is and how, how future inflation will perform. . So we, we monitor geopolitical risks really quickly, but, you know, but—really carefully, rather. But, you know, I would say so far those risks haven’t really— nothing has come out of those risks that really, has really been important for the United States economy. The single thing that you would look to is the price of oil, given that we’re talking about the Middle East and Ukraine, and, you know, and—but that, that is a good summary statistic for the kind of thing that could go wrong in, in, with global turmoil. But the price of oil’s been coming down, and, for, because of supply conditions, global supply conditions. So we don’t—the U.S. is not feeling, really, the effects of geopolitical turmoil, but we are at, certainly, at a time of elevated geopolitical turmoil. And it remains, you know, a risk. . Yeah, so inflation—again, we don’t overreact to a couple of months of higher readings or a couple months of lower readings. And we, what we had was—we had four months of really nice readings, and then September and October were higher, but then November is much lower. So I don’t really think the public is experiencing that as a surprising upside risk to inflation. I, I think inflation is much lower. What the public is feeling, and they’re right about it, is that prices are, are just—the price level went up, because of the past inflation. It is going to take some time to, for real wages to recover, over a period of years in which your, your real compensation is growing. And, in other words, your compensation’s growing meaningfully faster than inflation. That’s exactly the kind of economy we have now, and we just want to hold onto it. That, that process will probably take some years, but that’s, that’s what’s going on right now. And I don’t think that, you know, a, a couple of months of higher inflation really signal that, anything of the nature you’re suggesting. KELLY O’GRADY. And just one follow up: Let’s look more long term. You previously predicted hitting the 2 percent inflation target in 2026. It’s now been pushed out to 2027. You said you’re focused on enabling further progress on inflation. That’s not necessarily progress in the right direction. Are you confident that target isn’t going to move further out? . We’re talking about—when you’re projecting the economy, you know, three years out, two years out, you’re talking about high uncertainty. Very high uncertainty. You know, we, we really—at that point it, it’s not, it’s not possible to confidently predict where the economy is going to be in three years. So what we’re doing is we’re looking at what’s happening now. And we’re kind of projecting that the same kinds of things are happening—so we, we keep a strong labor market, housing services inflation comes down, goods and services—goods inflation settles down, and, you know, nonmarket services return to their, their prior level. All of those things should happen over time, and, and, you know, those pieces come together. There’s every reason to think that they will. The timing of it is highly uncertain. You know, but you’re not wrong, though, that, you know, we’ve, the— it’s been a bit frustrating because the—while we’ve made progress, it has been slower than we had hoped. Nonetheless, we’re still on track. And, you know, I think if you’d—if two, two years ago, you’d said, “we were [going to be] at 4.2 percent unemployment and 2.8 percent inflation,” people would be, would say, “I’ll take that.” I mean, that, that’s a pretty good interim place to be. Job’s not done, but, but I think we’re, we’re feeling good about where we are and where we’re headed. . No, we’re not going to settle for that. I think we’re, we’re, you know, we certainly have every intention and expectations that we’ll get inflation back sustainably to 2 percent. That is—and I am confident we will achieve that. It has taken longer, but it’s, you have to be—you know, we are making progress. We have made a great deal of progress. And we’ll continue to do so and get back to 2 percent inflation. That’s what we owe the public. And, and, you know, we’re committed to achieving it. . You don’t rule things completely in or out in this—in this world. That doesn’t appear to be a likely outcome. I think we’re at 4.3 percent. That’s, that’s meaningfully restrictive, and I, I think it’s a well calibrated rate for us to continue to make progress on inflation while, while keeping a, a strong labor market. So—Thank you very much.

****FOMCpresconf20250129

. Good afternoon. My colleagues and I remain squarely focused on achieving our dual mandate goals of maximum employment and stable prices for the benefit of the American people. The economy is strong—is strong overall and has made significant progress toward our goals over the past two years. Labor market conditions have cooled from their formerly overheated state and remain solid. Inflation has moved much closer to our 2 percent longer run goal, though it remains somewhat elevated. In support of our goals, today the Federal Open Market Committee decided to leave our policy interest rate unchanged and to continue to reduce our securities holdings. I’ll have more to say about monetary policy after briefly reviewing economic developments. Recent indicators suggest that economic activity has continued to expand at a solid pace. For 2024 as a whole, GDP looks to have risen above 2 percent, bolstered by resilient consumer spending. Investment in equipment and intangibles appears to have slowed in the fourth quarter but was strong for the year overall. Following weakness in the middle of last year, activity in the housing sector seems to have stabilized. In the labor market, conditions remain solid. Payroll job gains averaged 170,000 per month over the past three months. Following earlier increases, the unemployment rate has stabilized since the middle of last year and, at 4.1 percent in December, remains low. Nominal wage growth has eased over the past year, and the jobs to workers gap has narrowed. Overall, a wide set of indicators suggests that conditions in the labor market are broadly in balance. The labor market is not a source of significant inflationary pressures. Inflation has eased significantly over the past two years but remains somewhat elevated relative to our 2 percent longer run goal. Estimates based on the consumer price index and other data indicate that total PCE prices rose 2.6 percent over the 12 months ending in December and that, excluding the volatile food and energy categories, core PCE prices rose 2.8 percent. Longer term inflation expectations appear to remain well anchored, as reflected in a broad range of surveys of households, businesses, and forecasters, as well as measures from financial markets. Our monetary policy actions are guided by our dual mandate to promote maximum employment and stable prices for the American people. We see the risks to achieving our employment and inflation goals as being roughly in balance, and we are attentive to the risks on both sides of our mandate. Over the course of our three previous meetings, we lowered our policy rate by a full percentage point from its peak. That recalibration of our policy stance was appropriate in light of the progress on inflation and the rebalancing in the labor market. With our policy stance significantly less restrictive than it had been and the economy remaining strong, we do not need to be in a hurry to adjust our policy stance. At today’s meeting, the Committee decided to maintain the target range for the federal funds rate at 4¼ to 4½ percent. We know that reducing policy restraint too fast or too much could hinder progress on inflation. At the same time, reducing policy restraint too slowly or too little could unduly weaken economic activity and employment. In considering the extent and timing of additional adjustments to the target range for the federal funds rate, the Committee will assess incoming data, the evolving outlook, and the balance of risks. We’re not on any preset course. As the economy evolves, we will adjust our policy stance in a manner that best promotes our maximum employment and price stability goals. If the economy remains—economy remains strong and inflation does not continue to move sustainably toward 2 percent, we can maintain policy restraint for longer. If the labor market were to weaken unexpectedly or inflation were to fall more quickly than anticipated, we can ease policy accordingly. Policy is well positioned to deal with the risks and uncertainties that we face in pursuing both sides of our dual mandate. As we previously announced, our five year review, review of our monetary policy framework is taking place this year. At this meeting, the Committee began its discussions by reviewing the context and outcomes of our previous review that concluded in 2020 as well as the experiences of other central banks in conducting reviews. Our review will again include outreach and public events involving a wide range of parties, including Fed Listens events around the country and a research conference in May. Throughout this process, we will be open to new ideas and critical feedback, and we will take on board lessons of the last five years in determining our findings. We intend to wrap up the review by late summer. I would note that the Committee’s 2 percent longer run inflation goal will, will be retained and will not be a focus of the review. The Fed has been assigned two goals for monetary policy: maximum employment and stable prices. We remain committed to supporting maximum employment, bringing inflation sustainably to our 2 percent goal, and keeping longer run inflation expectations well anchored. Our success in delivering on these goals matters to all Americans. We understand that our actions affect communities, families, and businesses across the country. Everything we do is in service to our public mission. We at the Fed will do everything we can to achieve our maximum employment and price stability goals. Thank you. I look forward to your questions. . Three questions. I’m seeing, seeing it really as one question, though. So, I, I’m not going to have—I’m not going to have any, any response or comment whatsoever on, on what the President’s said. It’s not appropriate for me to do so. The public should be confident that we will continue to do our work as we always have—focusing on using our tools to achieve our goals, and really keeping our heads down and doing our work. And that’s how we best serve the public. . I’ve had no contact. . Thanks. . I don’t think that my assessment really has changed. I mean, a couple of things have happened. We’ve gotten more strong data, but we’ve also seen rates move up at the long end, which could represent a tightening in financial conditions. I think if we look back over the past year or so, we can see that policy is restrictive. If you look at the effect of high rates on interest sensitive spending—for example, in housing—and if you look at the achievement of our goal variables, we’re seeing the economy move toward 2 percent inflation and, and has moved largely to maximum employment, so. Though we literally look at the—at the—at movement toward the goal variables to make that assessment. Now, policy is meaningfully less restrictive than it was before we began to cut. It’s 100 basis points less restrictive. And for that reason, you know, we’re going to be focusing on seeing real progress on inflation or, alternatively, some weakness in the labor market before we—before we consider making adjustments. . So, I, I think our policy stance is very well calibrated, as I mentioned, to balance the achievement of our two—of our two goals. We, we want to—policy to be restrictive enough to continue to foster further, further progress for our 2 percent inflation goal. At the same time, we don’t need to see further weakening in the labor market to achieve that goal, and that’s kind of what we’ve been getting. The labor market has really been broadly stable  the unemployment rate has been broadly stable now for six months. Conditions seem to be broadly in balance. And I would say, look at the last couple of inflation readings and you see we don’t—we don’t overreact to two good readings or two bad readings. But, nonetheless, the last couple of readings have suggested, you know, more positive readings. So I, I think we’re—I think policy’s well, well positioned. . No, so let me look—if you just look at the first paragraph, we did a little bit of language cleanup there. We took out a reference to “since earlier in the year” as it related to the labor market, and we just chose to, to shorten that sentence. Again, I, I mean, if you look at the sort of intermeeting data was good, and, and there was—there was another inflation reading, I guess, just before the December meeting. So, we’ve got two, two good readings in a row that are consistent with 2 percent inflation. Again, we’re not going to overinterpret two good or two bad readings, but this was not meant to send a signal other than this: You know, you, you can take away from all of this that we remain committed to achieving our 2 percent inflation goal sustainably. . Well I, I’d say you, you see expectations moving up a little bit, at the short end—but not at the longer run, which [is] where it really matters. And those could be related to—could be related to what you mentioned, some of the new policies. I think where the Committee is very much in the mode of waiting to see what policies are enacted. We, and we, we don’t know what will happen with, with tariffs, with immigration, with fiscal policy, and with regulatory policy. We’re only just beginning to see—actually, are not really beginning to see much, and I think we need to—we need to let those policies be articulated before we can even begin to make a, a plausible assessment of what their implications for the economy will be. So we’re going to be watching carefully and, and, as we always do. This is no different than any other set of policy changes at the beginning of a—of an Administration. We’ll patiently watch and understand and, and, you know, kind of not be in a hurry to, to get to a place of understanding what our policy response should be until we see how it plays out. . Well, at all times—at all times, forecasts are conditional, at a minimum, on just a set of expectations, and, and they’re highly uncertain in both directions. We, we know that economic forecasting is, is really difficult, beyond just a month or two out. So in the current situation, there’s probably some elevated uncertainty because of, of, you know, significant policy shifts in those four areas that I mentioned: tariffs, tariffs, immigration, fiscal policy, and, and regulatory policy. So there’s probably some additional uncertainty, but that should be passing  we should go through that. And then we’ll be back to the regular amount of uncertain. You know, what, what forecasters are doing—not just us, but everybody’s doing—is they’ve got sort of just a set of assumptions about what might happen, but they’re really kind of in the nature of a placeholder, and—meaning, you know, plausible, could be, but honestly you wouldn’t stand behind it because you just don’t know, and so you’re just—you’re just on hold, waiting to see what comes down. You know, it’s, it’s a very large economy, and policies affect it at the margin, but we’ll, you know, we’re going to wait and see. . You know, we’re—we’re looking—it’s more the other—the way— the way it works is, we are looking at the data to guide us in what we should do. And, you know, that, that’s what we do. And right now, we feel like we’re in a very good place. Policy’s well positioned. The economy’s in, in quite a good place, actually, as well. And what, what we do expect is to see further progress on inflation, and, you know, as I mentioned, as we see that—or if we were to see weakening in the labor market that could foster—we could then be in a position of, of making further adjustments. But, right now, we, we don’t see that, and we see things as in a really good place for policy and for the economy, and so we feel like we don’t need to be in a hurry to, to make any adjustments. . So let me say, “yes,” in answer to your first question. But, to the second question, I want to say this: We are, like others, we’re reviewing the orders and the associated details as they are made available. And as has been our practice over many Administrations, we are working to align our policies with the executive orders as appropriate and consistent with applicable law. And I want to add that I’m not going to have anything more specific for you today on this whole set of issues. . So I did—I did mention “consistent with applicable law,” right? . You know, I’ve—as I’ve said countless times over the years, this is—this is who we are  this is what we do. We study the data, we, we analyze how it will affect the outlook and the balance of risks, and we use our tools to try to give it our best understanding, our best thinking, try to achieve our goals. That’s what we do  that’s always what we do. Don’t look for us to do anything else. And that’s—you know, lots of research shows that’s the—that’s the best way for a central bank to operate. That’ll give us the best possible chance to achieve these goals for the benefit of the American people. That’s always what we’re going to do. And people should have confidence in that, as I—as I said a few minutes ago. . So one of the things our, our staff does is they, they look at a range of possible outcomes, and, and they, they tend to go from really good to really bad, and, you know, it’s, it’s one of the best things that they do. And in each Tealbook—you can look at the five year old Tealbooks and see their alternative simulations. So that’s what they do. They, it’ll be a baseline, and then they’ll show six or seven alternative scenarios, including really good ones and, and not so good ones. And what those do is they spark, you know, the, the policymakers to sort of think and understand about the, you know, the, the uncertainties that surround this. So, yes, we, we—staff does that, and we, we’re all well aware that there are—that the range of possibilities is always broad, and—not just now, but always. And you have to—it’s hard to be open to just how, how broad the possibilities are for an economy. You know, no one saw the pandemic coming, and it was—you know, it changed everything. So things happen, and—but yes, we do—we do do that. But it’s, it’s one thing to do that to make assessments about what might happen and begin to think about what you might do in that case, but you don’t act until you—until you see much more than we see now. . I’d say it’s the same. You know, we, we want to see, you know, further progress on inflation. And, you know, the story’s there. It’s, it’s—we’re just going to have to see the data. At the end of the day, it, it comes down to 12 month inflation, because that takes out the seasonality issues that may exist. And, you know, we’re, we’re just going to need to see that. We think that—we think we see the pathway for that to happen. One, one example—a key example—is that you now do see owner’s equivalent rent and, you know, housing services—the way it’s calculated for PCE [prices], you see that coming down pretty steadily now, and that’s the—that’s the place where the, most of the remaining gap is. In addition, a big part of the overrun, as you will know, was [coming] from nonmarket services [prices], which don’t tend to send much signal [about future inflation]. So you can look through all that and, and think, “Okay, that then we seem to be set up for further progress.” But being seem to set up for it is one thing  having it is another. So we, we’re going to want to see further, further progress on inflation. Remember, we’re not, you know, we’re, we’re under—2 percent, but our goal is 2 percent, and we do mean to get back sustainably to 2 percent. . So you’re right. I mean, we look at, of course, a very broad range. And, so, it starts with unemployment—sorry, with, yeah, with the unemployment rate, employment participation, wages, job quits—are people quitting?—that kind of thing. The ratio of vacancies to unemployed. We look at all those things, and you, you put your finger, though, on—it’s a low—it’s a low hiring environment. So if you have a job, it’s all—it’s all good, but if you—if you have to find a job, the job finding rate—the hiring rates have come down. And that’s, that’s more typical of a—let’s say—let’s say that the unemployment—that the—that the labor market is at a sustainable level. It’s not overheated anymore. We don’t think we need it to cool off anymore. We do watch it extremely carefully. It’s one of our two goal variables. But, yeah, I, I’d say we watch those things quite carefully. But nonetheless, overall, look at the aggregate data in the labor market. It does seem to—the labor market does seem, seem to be pretty stable and broadly in balance. When you’ve got a, an unemployment rate that is—that has been pretty stable now for, for a, a full half a year. . You know, so what’s happening is that the, the flows across the border have decreased very significantly, and there’s every reason to expect that to continue. And so—but job creation has come down a bit, too, so, you know, if those two things come down together, that, that sort of can be a reason for the unemployment rate to stabilize. In other words, a breakeven rate—as, as population growth slows, the breakeven rate that you need in new jobs to make—to, to make jobs for, for workers declines as well. So that seems to be something about what’s happening. You, you do see a very—a very flat unemployment rate at a time when you’ve seen significant declines [in job growth]. . You know, we, we run a very careful budget process where we’re fully aware that what, that, you know, we owe the—we owe that to the public, and we believe we do that. I, I’ve got no further comment than that, thanks. . Chris, I’m not going to—I’m not going to react or discuss anything that, that any elected politician might say. So I’ll give you a mulligan. . Sure, I’d be glad to. So we considered this, you know, really at length, and we did decide to withdraw from the NGFS. And, really, the reason is that the, the work that the NGFS does has broadened very significantly. Think about nature related risks and biodiversity and things like that. In addition, the, the work of the NGFS is, is, in, in significant part intended to—and this is a quote—“mobilize mainstream finance to support the transition toward a sustainable economy.” So we joined to get the benefit of understanding what other central banks were doing and, and seeing research and things like that. I think this is just way beyond any plausible mandate that you could attribute to the Fed, and so we have a quite narrow role, as I’ve—as I’ve said many times, and I think that, that the activities of the NGFS are not a good fit for the Fed, given our current mandate and authority. So, you know, and I just think it was time to acknowledge that. You know, the, the process—this process dates back—thinking about it dates back a couple of years. I made the decision to bring this to the Board, you know, some months ago. It just—it just—the process just took time to get here, and, and this is when— this is when we, we got in and voted on it, so. And I’m aware of how it can look, but it was really not driven by politics  it was driven by kind of the disconnect between the work of the NGFS and our mandate. Other central banks have different mandates and belong to the NGFS. We have no, no criticism of them. But it just isn’t—it’s not right for the Fed. . Well, 2 percent—inflation down to—inflation down to 2 percent sustainably is what, what we’re trying to achieve. You know, we’re, we’re somewhat above that, as you know, and, you know, we, we want to see, you know, serial readings that suggest that we’re making further progress on inflation. That’s what we want to see. And consumers will, will pick that up, of course, in the things that they buy at the grocery store or at the store. . Yeah, you can’t know with any precision, of course. As I like to say, that you know that—you know the neutral rate by its works. So I think, you know, at 4.3 percent we’re, we’re above pretty much everyone on the Committee’s estimates of the longer run neutral. I think our eyes are telling us that our policy is having the effects on the economy. That’s really the question we ask. You know, you can consult models, empirical models, theoretical models. You really have to just look out the window and see how your—how your policy rate is affecting the economy. And I think we see that it’s having meaningful effects in bringing inflation under control. It has helped bring the labor market into balance as well. So that’s what we think. I, I would say we’re meaningfully above it. I, I am—I, I have no illusion that, that anyone knows precisely how much that is. And, but it, you know—not knowing that, and having cut 100 basis points, means that it’s appropriate that we—that we not be in a hurry to make further adjustments. . So it’s been—it’s been our practice, as I mentioned, to work to align our policies to those that are mentioned in, in the executive orders. And that’s—I’m just going to leave it at that. As I mentioned, I’m not going to—I’m not going to go any deeper than that or, or get into any deeper into this set of issues today. . Sorry, make a—? . So we just—so first of all, thing, things are a little different now. We’ve just come through a high inflation period, and you can argue that both ways. You can— you can say that companies have figured out that they do like to raise prices, but, but we also hear a lot from companies these days that consumers have really had it with price increases, and so I don’t know how that shakes out. Nonetheless, you’re coming through a situation where we’re not quite back to 2 percent, and that, that’s just different. In addition, you know, the trade—the kind of footprint of trade is, has changed a, a lot, as trade is now spread around the, you know—it’s not as concentrated in China as it was. There was a lot more manufacturing. It moved to Mexico and other places. So, so there were differences, and I just think the, the range of possibilities is, is very, very wide. We just don’t know, and I, I don’t want to start speculating, as tempting as it is, because we really don’t know. And we didn’t know, by the way, in, I guess, 2018. Yeah, we didn’t really know. And it, you know, the—again, the range of possibilities, very, very wide. We don’t know what’s going to be tariff. We don’t know for how long or how much, what countries. We don’t know about retaliation. We don’t know how it’s going to transmit through the economy to consumers. That’s, that really does remain to be seen. You know, there are lots of places where that—where that—where that price increase from the tariff can show up between the manufacturer and a consumer. Just so many variables. So we’re just going to have to wait and see. And, you know, the best we can do is what we’ve done, which is study up on this and, you know, look at historical experience, read the literature, and think about the factors that might matter, and then we’ll just have to see—have to see how it—how it goes. . So, on QT, on—let’s, let’s talk about runoff. So the most recent data do suggest that reserves are still abundant. Reserves remain roughly as high as they were when runoff began. And the federal funds rate has been very steady within the target range. We track a, a bunch of metrics, and they do tend to point to, to reserves being abundant. We do intend to reduce the size of our balance sheet to a level that’s consistent with implementing monetary policy efficiently and effectively in our ample reserves regime. We’re closely monitoring a, a range of indicators to assess conditions, and that should provide signals whether reserves are approaching a level that could be judged as, quote, “somewhat above ample.” I, I don’t have anything to say to you about particular dates  it’s just that’s the process, and what we see is, is that, that rates do appear to be abundant. As always, we stand ready to take appropriate action to support the smooth transition of monetary policy, including to adjust the details of our approach for reducing the size of the balance sheet in light of economic and financial developments. On, on AI, it’s a big event in, in the stock market and in particular parts of the stock market. I mean, what, what really matters for us is macro developments, and that means substantial changes in financial conditions that are persistent for a period of time. So I wouldn’t put that label on, on these events, although of course we’re all watching it with interest. . So, as you know, as we’ve reduced our, our policy rate 100 basis points, longer rates have gone up. Not because of expectations—not principally because of expectations about our policy or about inflation  it’s more a term premium story. So, and, you know, it’s long rates that matter for, for housing. So I, I don’t think—I think these higher rates are going to—they’re, they’re probably hold back housing activities to some extent, if they’re persistent. We’ll have to see how long they persist. So, you know, we, we are—we control an overnight rate. Generally, it, it propagates through the whole family of asset prices, including interest rates. But in this particular case, it’s all happened at a time when, for reasons unrelated to our policy, longer rates have moved up. . No, I wouldn’t say that. We, we’ve never said we need to be all the way at target to reduce rates. At, at any time, what we’re doing is we’re looking at the economy and asking whether our policy stance is the right one to achieve maximum employment and price stability. So I, I think if—we would want to see further progress, but we think our—we think our—as I mentioned, we think that our policy stance is restrictive. Meaningfully restrictive. Not highly restrictive, but meaningfully restrictive. And so I would think we need to see further progress. I wouldn’t say all the way back down to 2 percent on a sustainable basis, although we’d love to see that, of course, and we will. . You know, we—I want to avoid commenting, even indirectly, on the conduct of tariffs. You know, it’s not our job, and it’s not our job to comment on the moves that people make. So I, I wouldn’t want to criticize anything that’s happening or really comment on it one way or another—praise it, for that matter. It’s just not our job. I do think that—you know, we found in, in 2018, [when] there was a lot of work done on trade policy uncertainty, trade policy uncertainty, if it’s large and persistent, can start to matter for businesses making investment decisions and things like that. That’s not something I’m observing today. It’s very early days for this. But that did—I think that did matter in 2018–19. And, and it’s one, you know, one of many things we’ll be watching. . So we, we look—we look at, from a financial stability perspective, at asset prices generally, along with things like leverage in the household sector, leverage in the banking system, funding risk for banks, and things like that. But it’s just one of the four things, asset prices are. And, yeah, I, I’d say they’re elevated by, by many metrics right now. A good part of that, of course, is this thing around tech and AI, but we, we look at that. But, you know, we also—we look at how resilient the households and, and businesses and the financial sector are to those things. So we look at that mainly from our financial stability perspective, and we think that there’s a lot of resilience out there. Banks have high capital, and households are actually, overall—not all households, but in, in the aggregate, households are in pretty good shape financially these days. So that’s how we think about that. I, you know, we, we also—we look at overall financial conditions, and you’ve got—you can’t just take—you can’t just take equity prices. You’ve got to look at rates, too, and that, you know, that represents a, a tightening in conditions, with higher rates. So, overall, financial conditions are probably still somewhat accommodative, but it’s a mixed bag. . Well, the things we watch, we discussed earlier. One, one is, is that there’s a low hiring rate. And so that if, if there were to be a spike in layoffs, if companies were to start to reduce headcount, you would see unemployment go up pretty quickly, because the hiring rate is quite low. So that, that’s one thing we look at. I think it’s also—it’s worth pointing out that for lower income households, they are— they’re under significant pressure. And in the aggregate, the numbers are good, but we know that people at the lower end of the income spectrum are, are struggling with, with costs. And, really, it’s, it’s high inflation for the basics of life. It’s not so much the inflation now  it’s the price level, because inflation has raised prices. Inflation is now closer—much closer to target, but people are really feeling that. But, you know, overall, this is a good labor market. Here you’re at 4.1 percent unemployment. That’s, that’s just a really good level, and you’ve been solidly there now for six, seven months. And job creation is pretty close to a level that will hold the unemployment rate there, given, given that, you know, there’ll be much slower population growth. . You know, we hear anecdotal reports, but I, I don’t see—there’s nothing in the data yet on that. But you do—you hear—you hear that kind of thing about construction, for example. And, and, you know, businesses that are dependent on immigrant labor are, are saying that it’s, it’s suddenly gotten harder to, to get people. But I, again—I know—you don’t see that in the aggregate data yet, but yes, you, you hear it anecdotally. . I guess I’d say this: Uncertainty is, is with us all the time. It’s, it is human nature, apparently, to underestimate the—how fat the tails are, in a way, that, you know, the, the possibility—we think of things in a normal distribution, and in the economy it’s not a normal distribution. The tails are very fat, meaning things can happen way out of your expectations. It’s never not that way. I wouldn’t—you know, if you—if you think about it— think about the first few months of the pandemic. That was uncertainty. Are we going to be able to reopen the economy? If so, when? How much of it? How long will it take? You know, that was uncertainty. What we have now is a good labor market. We have the economy growing at, you know, 2 to 2½ percent. Inflation’s come down to, to now the, you know—the headline inflation number was 2.6 [percent], and that’s what the public experiences. We look at—we look at core because it’s a better indicator of future inflation. So, yes, the price level went up a lot for inflation, and people are feeling that, and, and they’re not wrong. But I—so the kind of uncertainty we have is just a, a usual level of uncertainty about the economy. But then policies—which are, you know, not for us to criticize or, or praise, really—those are—those are policies which people are, have been elected to implement. They’re implementing them with a view to, to making a better economy. And so I, I don’t think—I wouldn’t call this out as, as a— as one of those times. I wouldn’t compare it to the Global Financial Crisis or anything like that, given that we have actually a very good economy right now. . So, as, as I mentioned, the economy’s strong, the labor market’s solid, downside risks to the labor market appear to have abated, and we think disinflation continues on a slow and sometimes bumpy path. That tells me and the other members of the Committee—the broad sense of the Committee, actually, is that we don’t need to be in a hurry to adjust our policy stance. Your second question was? . You know, it’s one of those things we’ll know it when we see it. But more, more the—the expectation is that we will make continued progress, and, you know, that’s what we want. We, we’ll know it when we see it. When we—it, it’s going to have to be something that isn’t just idiosyncratic. You’re going to want to see, you know, continued progress with housing services inflation  you’re going to want to see inflation behaving in a way that builds confidence that we are really making progress. That’s what it’s going to be. And, I mean, is, is that better than our expectations? If we expect to see that, it’s just a question of when. . I think to—I think that goal has served us well over a long period of time. It’s also the sort of global standard. I think that if, if a central bank wanted to look at changing that, you wouldn’t do it at a time when you’re not meeting it anyway. I would not look at changing it anyway, but I certainly wouldn’t look at, at it at a time when you’re not—when you’re not meeting it. I mean, there’s just no interest at all in changing it, if, if I’m being at all unclear. We’re not—we’re not going to change the inflation goal any time soon. . So what we really said was that we wouldn’t—we wouldn’t look at a—at a strong labor market and raise rates unless we saw some evidence of inflation. So the thought was that we’d seen really low levels of inflation—sorry, of unemployment—with no sign of inflation. So why would you preemptively want to—want to put people out of work in the absence of, of any kind of—any evidence that suggested that, that this was not a sustainable level? It was a way of, of acknowledging how much humility we have about, about the starred variables, especially u*, the natural rate of unemployment. So, that was a—that, that was an insight. We’ll, we’ll discuss that again. That’ll be one of the many things that we discuss. But I don’t think that insight is wrong. We didn’t—you know, we, we—what we said was that, you know, in—at times when inflation persistently undershot 2 percent, we, we would likely allow inflation to run moderately above 2 percent for some time. That’s what we said. That was— turned out not to be relevant to what actually happened. There was nothing moderate about the overshoot. It was—it was an exogenous event. It was the pandemic, and it happened, and, you know, our framework permitted us to act quite vigorously, and we did once we decided that that’s what we should do. Our framework had really nothing to do with the decision to—we, we looked at the inflation as, as transitory, and—right up to the point where the data turned against that, and when the data turned against that in late ’21, we changed our, our view, and we raised rates a lot, and here we are at 4.1 percent unemployment and inflation way down. But the framework was, was more irrelevant than anything else. The, the, that part of it—that part of it was irrelevant. The rest of the framework worked just fine as, as we used it, as it supported what we did to bring inflation down. . You know, so our, our role with Bitcoin, really, is to look at—with crypto, really, is to look at the banks, and, and, you know, we, we think it’s—you know, banks are perfectly able to serve crypto customers, as long as they understand and can manage the risks and its safe, safe and soundness. Many of our—a good number of our banks that we regulate and supervise do that. You know, the threshold has been a little higher for banks engaging in crypto activities, and that’s because they’re so new, and, you know, we don’t want to make the mistake you’re—if you—if you’re making a choice to conduct that activity inside a bank which is inside the federal safety net, with deposit insurance, then you want to be pretty sure that, that it’s a safe and sound activity. So, you know, we’re, we’re not against innovation, and we certainly don’t want to, to take actions that would cause banks to, you know, to terminate customers who are perfectly legal just because of, of excess risk aversion maybe related to regulation and supervision, so. . I, you know, that’s, that’s kind of a—it’s not really our, our bailiwick. You want people to be knowledgeable about the financial engagements that they have, and that’s why we have, you know, the securities law, laws that we have. It’s why, you know, if you read a mutual fund prospectus or individual stock prospectus, you, you want households to have the chance to understand the risk that they’re taking. And, you know, I, I do think it would be helpful if there were a greater regulatory apparatus around crypto, and I think that, that’s something Congress was working on quite a lot. We’ve actually spent a lot of time, you know, with members of Congress working together with them on, on various things, and I, I think that would be a very constructive thing for, for Congress to do. Thank you.

****FOMCpresconf20250319

. Good afternoon. My colleagues and I remain squarely focused on achieving our dual mandate goals of maximum employment and stable prices for the benefit of the American people. The economy is strong overall and has made significant progress toward our goals over the past two years. Labor market conditions are solid, and inflation has moved closer to our 2 percent longer run goal, though it remains somewhat elevated. In support of our goals, today the Federal Open Market Committee decided to leave our policy interest rate unchanged. We also made the technical decision to slow the pace of decline in the size of our balance sheet. I’ll have more to say about these decisions after briefly reviewing economic developments. Economic activity continued to expand at a solid pace in the fourth quarter of last year, with GDP rising at 2.3 percent. Recent indications, however, point to a moderation in consumer spending following the rapid growth seen over the second half of 2024. Surveys of households and businesses point to heightened uncertainty about the economic outlook. It remains to be seen how these developments might affect future spending and investment. In our Summary of Economic Projections, the median participant projects GDP to rise 1.7 percent this year, somewhat lower than projected in December, and to rise a bit below 2 percent over the next two years. In the labor market, conditions remain solid. Payroll job gains averaged 200,000 per month over the past three months. The unemployment rate, at 4.1 percent, remains low and has held in a narrow range for the past year. The jobs to workers gap has held steady for several months. Wages are growing faster than inflation and at a more sustainable pace than earlier in the pandemic recovery. Overall, a wide set of indicators suggests that conditions in the labor market are broadly in balance. The labor market is not a source of significant inflationary pressures. The median projection for the unemployment rate in the SEP is 4.4 percent at the end of this year and 4.3 percent over the next two years. Inflation has eased significantly over the past two years but remains somewhat elevated relative to our 2 percent longer run goal. Estimates based on the consumer price index and other data indicate that total PCE prices rose 2.5 percent over the 12 months ending in February and that, excluding the volatile food and energy categories, core PCE prices rose 2.8 percent. Some near term measures of inflation expectations have recently moved up. We see this in both market  and survey based measures, and survey respondents, both consumers and businesses, are mentioning tariffs as a driving factor. Beyond the next year or so, however, most measures of longer term expectations remain consistent with our 2 percent inflation goal. The median projection in the SEP for total PCE inflation is 2.7 percent this year and 2.2 percent next year, a little higher than projected in December. In 2027, the median projection is at our 2 percent objective. Our monetary policy actions are guided by our dual mandate to promote maximum employment and stable prices for the American people. At today’s meeting, the Committee decided to maintain the target range for the federal funds rate at 4¼ to 4½ percent. Looking ahead, the new Administration is in the process of implementing significant policy changes in four distinct areas: trade, immigration, fiscal policy, and regulation. It is the net effect of these policy changes that will matter for the economy and for the path of monetary policy. While there have been recent developments in some of these areas, especially trade policy, uncertainty around the changes and their effects on the economic outlook is high. As we parse the incoming information, we’re focused on separating the signal from the noise as the outlook evolves. As we say in our statement, in considering the extent and timing of additional adjustments to the target range for the federal funds rate, the Committee will assess incoming data, the evolving outlook, and the balance of risks. We do not need to be in a hurry to adjust our policy stance, and we are well positioned to wait for greater clarity. In our SEP, FOMC participants wrote down their individual assessments of an appropriate path for the federal funds rate, based on what each participant judges to be the most likely scenario going forward—an admittedly challenging exercise at this time in light of considerable uncertainty. The median participant projects that the appropriate level of the federal funds rate will be 3.9 percent at the end of this year and 3.4 percent at the end of next year, unchanged from December. While these individual forecasts are always subject to uncertainty, as I noted, uncertainty today is unusually elevated. And, of course, these projections are not a Committee plan or a decision. Policy is not on a preset course. As the economy evolves, we will adjust our policy stance in a manner that best promotes our maximum employment and price stability goals. If the economy remains strong and inflation does not continue to move sustainably toward 2 percent, we can maintain policy restraint for longer. If the labor market were to weaken unexpectedly or inflation were to fall more quickly than anticipated, we can ease policy accordingly. Our current policy stance is well positioned to deal with the risks and uncertainties that we face in pursuing both sides of our dual mandate. At today’s meeting, we also decided to slow the pace of decline in our balance sheet. Since we began balance sheet runoff, our securities holdings have declined by more than $2 trillion. While market indicators continue to suggest that the quantity of reserves remains abundant, we have seen some signs of increased tightness in money markets. Beginning in April, the monthly cap on Treasury redemptions will be lowered from $25 billion to $5 billion. Consistent with the Committee’s intention to hold primarily Treasury securities in the longer run, we are leaving the cap on agency securities unchanged. This action has no implications for our intended stance of monetary policy and should not affect the size of our balance sheet over the medium term. The Committee also continued its discussions as part of our five year review of our monetary policy framework. At this meeting, we focused on labor market dynamics and our maximum employment goal. As we have indicated, our review will include outreach and public events involving a wide range of parties, including Fed Listens events around the country and a research conference in May. Throughout this process, we will be open to new ideas and critical feedback, and we will take on board lessons of the last five years in determining our findings. We intend to wrap up the review by late summer. The Fed has been assigned two goals for monetary policy: maximum employment and stable prices. We remain committed to supporting maximum employment, bringing inflation sustainably to our 2 percent goal, and keeping longer term inflation expectations well anchored. Our success in delivering on these goals matters to all Americans. We understand that our actions affect communities, families, and businesses across the country. Everything we do is in service to our public mission. We at the Fed will do everything we can to achieve our maximum employment and price stability goals. Thank you. I will look forward to your questions. . Okay, so how much of it is, is tariffs? So let me say that it is going to be very difficult to have a precise assessment of how much of inflation is coming from tariffs and from, from other—and that’s already the case. You may have seen that goods inflation moved up pretty significantly in the first two months of the year. Trying to track that back to actual tariff increases, given what was tariffed and what was not—very, very challenging. So some of it—the, the answer is clearly some of it—a good part of it is, is coming from tariffs. But we’ll be—we’ll be working, and so will other forecasters, to try to find the best possible way to separate nontariff inflation from tariff inflation. In terms of the, the—your, your sort of looking through question, too soon to say about that. As, as I’ve mentioned, it, it can be the case that it’s appropriate sometimes to look through inflation if it’s going to go away quickly without action by, by us, if it’s transitory. And that can be the case in the case of, of tariff inflation. I think that would depend on the, the tariff inflation moving through fairly quickly and would depend critically, as well, on inflation expectations being well anchored—longer term inflation expectations being well anchored. . So I think—I think that’s kind of the base case, but, as I said, it’s— we really can’t know that. We’re going to have to see how things actually, actually work out. And the fact that there wasn’t much change—I think that’s, that’s partly because, you know, you see—you see weaker growth but higher inflation. They kind of offset. And also, frankly, a little bit of inertia when it—when it comes to changing something in this highly uncertain environment. You know, you’re—you, you know, I think there is a level of inertia where you just say, “Maybe I’ll stay where I am.” . So our inflation expectations—of course, we do monitor inflation expectations very, very carefully—basically, every source we can find, and, you know—short  term, long term, households, businesses, forecasters, market based. And I think the picture, broadly, is this: You do see increases widely in short term inflation expectations. And people who fill out surveys and answer, you know, questionnaires are pointing to tariffs about that. If you look—in the survey world, if you look a little further out, you, you really—you really don’t see much in the way of an increased longer term inflation—inflation expectations are mostly well anchored, if you look at the [series maintained by the Federal Reserve Bank of] New York, for example. Then you have market based, and it’s the same pattern. You know, people and markets are pricing in and, and breakevens, some higher inflation over the next year must be related to tariffs. We know from the surveys. But if you look out five years or five year, five  year forward, you’ll see that breakevens have—are either flat or, actually, slightly down in the case of a longer term one. So we look at that, and we will be watching all of it very, very carefully. We do not take anything for granted. That’s at the very heart of our framework: anchored inflation expectations. But what—that’s what you see right now. . So let’s start with the hard data. You know, we, we do see pretty solid hard data still. So growth looks like it’s maybe moderating a bit, consumer spending moderating a bit, but still at a solid pace. Unemployment’s 4.1 percent. Job creation, most recently, has been at a healthy level. Inflation has started to move up now, we think partly in response to tariffs, and there may be a delay in further progress over the course of this year. So that’s the hard data. Overall, it’s a solid picture. The, the survey data, [in the case of] both household and businesses, show significant rise in uncertainty and significant concerns about downside risks. So how do we think about that? And that’s—that is the question. As I mentioned the other day, as you pointed out, the relationship between survey data and actual economic activity hasn’t been very tight. There have been plenty of times where people are saying very down—downbeat things about the economy and then going out and buying a new car. But we don’t know that that will be the case here. We will be watching very carefully for signs of weakness in the real data. Of course we will. But I, I—you know, given where we are, we think our policy’s in a good place to react to, to what comes. And we think that the right thing to do is, is to wait here for, you know, for greater clarity about, about what, what the economy’s doing. . So I, I do like that definition a lot. In fact, I used it at the recent conference where I spoke. So I think a world where, where people can make their daily economic decisions, and businesses, and they’re not having to think about the possibility of significantly high inflation—we know inflation will bounce around. That’s, that is price stability. You know, I think we were getting closer and closer to that. I wouldn’t say we were at that. Inflation was running around 2½ percent for some time. I do think with the arrival of, of the tariff inflation, further progress may be delayed, if the SEP doesn’t really show further downward progress on inflation this year. And that, that’s really due to the tariffs coming in. So, delayed, but if you look at our forecast, we do see ourselves getting back into the low 2s in ’26 and then down to 2 [percent] by ’27—of course, highly uncertain. So I see progress having, having been made toward that, and then progress in the future. I think that progress is probably delayed for the time being. . So, again, people wrote down two cuts the last time, and they look at—they look at the—you know, the—and they wrote down, you know, meaningful decline in growth out from 2.1 to 1.7 in 2025, a tick up in the unemployment rate, so not much there, but core inflation up by three tenths. And so those two kind of—those kind of balance each other out. So people—not everybody, but, on balance, people wrote down similar numbers. The changes aren’t that big. The other—the other factor, though, as I mentioned, is just really high uncertainty. What would you write down? I mean, it’s just—it’s really hard to know how this is going to work out. And, again, we think our policy’s in a good place. We think it’s a good place where we can move in the direction that—where we need to. But in the meantime, we, we—it’s, it’s really appropriate to wait for further clarity, and, of course, you know, the costs of doing that, given that the economy is still solid, are very low. . Yeah, so that’s a feature of the—has been for some time, a feature of this labor market. You have pretty high participation, accounting for aging. You’ve got wages that are consistent with 2 percent inflation, assuming that we’re going to keep getting, you know, relatively high productivity. We’ve got unemployment, you know, pretty close to its natural level. But job—the hiring rate is quite low, but so is the layoff rate. So the, the—you look at initial claims or layoffs. So you’re not seeing people losing their jobs, but you’re seeing that people who don’t have a job having to wait longer and longer. And, you know, the question is, which way does that break? If we were to see a meaningful increase in layoffs, then that would probably translate fairly quickly into unemployment, because people are—you know, it’s, it’s not a—it’s not a big hiring market. We’ve been watching that, and it’s just not in the data. It hasn’t happened. What we’ve had is, is a low firing, low hiring situation, and it seems to be in balance now for, you know, for the last six, seven, eight months. That’s where we are. There’s healthy levels of job creation, too. So, overall, it’s a labor market that’s in balance, and, you know, we, we watch it very carefully. . In labor? Or in, in other—? . I, you know, only in a—kind of an early way. I mean, it’s only been a few months, right? You know, for example, the, the layoffs that are happening here are, you know, they’re certainly meaningful to the people involved, and they may be meaningful to a particular neighborhood or region or area, but at the national level, they’re not—they’re not significant yet. But we don’t know. We don’t know what—where that—how far that will go. We’ll, we’ll find out much more. I mentioned that—you, you saw it—we’ve had two, two very strong goods inflation readings in the last two months, which is very unexpected, and, I think, hard to trace it to specific tariffs. But it must have—it must have something to do with—it’s either noise and it’ll come back, and that—that’s very possible, too. But if it is persistent, then it must be to do with, you know, people buying ahead of tariffs, or raising prices ahead of tariffs, and things like that. That—those kinds of things happen, and they’re very, very hard to capture because so much of it is indirect. A great example is there—washing machines were tariffed in the last, last round of tariffs, and prices went up, but prices also went up on, on dryers, which were not tariffed. So the manufacturers just, you know, they just kind of followed the crowd and, and raised it. So things happen very indirectly, and so there’ll be a lot of work done in the coming months to, to try to trace all that through. But, ultimately, though, it’s too soon to be seeing significant effects in economic data. . When you say “last time,” are you talking about the last— . You could have been talking about the last time there were tariffs. . In which case, the inflation was, was transitory. . Yeah. No—of course, we’re well aware of that. And, you know, it’s, it’s still the truth, if, if there’s an inflationary impulse that’s going to go away on its own, it’s not the right policy to, to tighten policy, because by the time you have your effect, you’re—you know, you’re—an effect that by—by design, you are lowering economic activity and employment. And if that’s not necessary, you don’t want to do it. In real time, as we know, it’s hard to make that judgment. So—and, and we’re well aware, you know, of what happened, obviously, with, with the pandemic inflation. But, I mean, we have to look at this as a—as a different situation. There’s, there are differences and similarities. I mean, it’s a different time. You know, we haven’t had real price stability fully reestablished yet, and we have to keep that in mind. And, you know, we also have—we hear that people are very reluctant to take on—to, you know, to, to allow prices to go up. At the same time, we hear that businesses are intending to pass many of these prices through. So it’s hard to say how this is going to work out. . You know—so we, we have two goals, right? We have maximum employment and price stability, and we have to balance those. And, you know, there can be situations in which they are in tension, right? And we have, actually have a provision in our—in our consensus statement that says what we should do in that case. That’s a very challenging, you know, situation for, for any central bank, and certainly for us. And so, what we say that we’ll do is, we’ll, we’ll look how far each of those two goals is—each of those two measures is from its goal, and then we’ll ask how long we think it might take to get back to the goal for each of them, and we’ll make a judgment, because our, you know, our tools work in one direction. We’re either tightening or loosening. So it’s a very challenging situation. Let me say, we don’t have that situation right now. That’s not what the—that’s not where the economy is at all. It’s also not where the forecast is. I don’t know any mainstream forecast that really shows significant problems like that, so— . You know, there’s always an unconditional probability—possibility of, of a recession. It might be broadly in the range of one in four at any time, if you look back through, through the years. It—there could be, within 12 months, a one in four chance of a recession. So the question is, is whether that—whether this current situation, those possibilities are elevated. I will say this: We don’t—we don’t make such a forecast. If you look at outside forecasts, forecasters have, have generally raised—a number of them have raised their possibility of a—of a recession somewhat, but still at relatively moderate levels—you know, still in the region of, of the traditional, because they were extremely low. If you go back two months, people were saying that the, the likelihood of a recession was extremely low. So, has moved up, but it’s not high. . So I think I, I did answer that question in this very room some time ago, and I, I [have] no desire to change that answer and have nothing new for you on that today. . So I, I mentioned it back then, but in no way did I place a huge weight on it. I think it, it—that was an ex post story, but it wasn’t the case. That was a preliminary reading, and so is this. And it’s also—this is—that, that Michigan, the one you’re referring to, the longer term thing—you know, we look at it, and we don’t dismiss data that we don’t like. We, we force ourselves to look at it. But it is an outlier compared to market based and compared to other survey based assessments of longer run inflation expectations, so we’ve got to keep that in mind. And I, I—again, I, I would just say, we look at—we look at all of them. And that one—that one’s kind of an outlier, but, you know, nonetheless, we, we take notice of it. . Yeah, look, we’re, we’re aware of the—we’re well aware of how things are going to evolve and the time frames and all that, and, you know, we will—we will use our tools to foster achievement of our goals to the—to the best we can. And, of course, we’re going to try to be timely with that. For right now, the hard data are pretty solid. We, we are obviously aware of the soft sentiment data and high uncertainty, and we’re watching that carefully. And we think it’s a, a good time for us to wait for further clarity before we consider adjusting our, our policy stance. . Yes, I think we will. I just—it’s hard to say when that will be. You know, we’re—these decisions are going to be made, and they’re going to be implemented, and then we’ll know. At that point, we’ll know what the decisions are, and we’ll have to make assessments then about their, their implications for the economy. Those things will happen. A lot of them will happen over the course of, you know, in coming months, certainly over the course of this year, and we’ll be adapting as we go. . So when we say “separating the signal from the noise,” that’s just a way of saying that things are highly uncertain and that, you know, you’re reading about developments—the news is full of developments of tariffs being put on and taken off and things like that. That’s—some of that is noise in the sense that it’s, it’s not really telling you anything. You’re trying to extract a signal from that, and the signal is what’s going to be the effect on economic activity, on inflation, on employment, and all those things. So, so that’s really when we say “signal and noise.” Sorry, the second thing was—? . That’s, that’s sort of a, a special case of that—of, you know, with the idea being—and I think—do think that the first two months of this year are a great example. You’ve got high readings for goods inflation after a string of readings that averaged close to zero, and you have to ask—it’s coming during tariffs, but, you know, you—it’s very hard to, actually, scientifically go back and match up those increases and say, “Yes, I can prove that that’s from tariffs.” But it kind of has to be, to some extent. Plus, noise. There can be idiosyncratic readings in various categories, which will shortly reverse, and that, that happens, too, and that could be a big piece of it. You know, I think we’ll know. In a couple of months, we’ll know whether those were—you know, where that really was from. But it’s a—that’s another case where I think it’s going to be very, very challenging to unpack the inflation that we see over the course of this year and be able to say with confidence how much of that came from inflation and how much of it—sorry, from tariffs—and how much of it didn’t. But that’s what we’ll be doing. We’ll be doing that, and so will everybody else, and we’ll all be trying very hard to, to make that assessment. And, you know, I, I’m sure we will make a lot of progress on that. And we already have. But it, it’s going to be a challenge. . You know, it would depend on what we’re talking about. I mean, obviously, you’re looking for direct evidence that, that particular pieces of, of inflation are, are— or are clearly not—caused by tariffs. For example, something that was, you know, in the service sector that was far away from anything that’s tariffed. You, you might think, okay, well that is— like, frankly, housing services inflation—which, which, by the way, has been behaving well. You know—which, for, for some time, was kind of our problem. Now it’s been—it’s slow, but it’s definitely, you know, moving down in a—in a very good way. It’s more now with goods and, to some extent, with, with nonhousing services inflation. . Okay, so a couple things. The grocery bill is about, about past inflation, really. There was inflation in ’21, ’22, and ’23, and prices went up. The current level—it’s not the change in prices. It’s, they’re unhappy—and, and they’re not wrong to be unhappy—that prices went up quite a bit, and they’re paying a lot for those things. So that’s—I think that is the fundamental fact and has been for a long time—a couple years—why people are unhappy with the—with the economy. It’s not that the economy’s not growing. It’s not that inflation’s really high. It’s not that unemployment is high. It’s none of those things. We have, you know, 4.1 percent unemployment. We’ve got 2 percent growth, and, you know, it’s, it’s a pretty good economy. But people are unhappy because of the price level. And, and I do—we completely understand and accept that. KELLY O’GRADY. And just to follow up: Why are you still projecting two rate cuts this year if your own projections show inflation higher for longer? Does that mean you see a slowdown in economic growth as a real threat? . So I, I think if you—yeah, I mean, remember, we came into this with—at the December meeting, and the median was two cuts, the median was. And so you come in, and you see, broadly speaking, weaker growth but higher inflation. And they kind of balance each other out, so you think—and, and unemployment is really, really only, only a one  tenth change. So it’s—there’s just not a big change in the forecast. There really isn’t. Modest, you know, meaningfully higher growth and meaningfully higher inflation, which call for different responses, right? So they cancel each other out, and people just said, “Okay, I’m going to stay here.” But the second factor is, it’s so highly uncertain. Is just—you know, we’re sitting here thinking—and we, we obviously are in, in touch with businesses and households all over the country. We have an extraordinary network of contacts that come in through the Reserve Banks and put it in the Beige Book—and also through contacts at the Board. And we get all that, and we, we do understand that sentiment has fallen off pretty sharply, but economic activity has not yet. And so we’re watching carefully. So I would tell people that the economy seems to be— seems to be healthy. We understand that, that sentiment is, is quite negative at this time, and that probably has to do with, you know, turmoil at the beginning of an Administration. It’s making, you know, big changes in, in areas of policy, and that’s probably part of it. I do think the underlying unhappiness people have about the economy, though, is more—is more about the price level. . Yeah, so, in the SEP, you’ll see that there’s not further progress on core inflation this year. We’re kind of side flatlining, going sideways. We don’t ask people to say—to write down how much of this is from tariffs and how much of it is not. But some of it is from tariffs. We know that tariffs are coming, and we know that they’re probably already—all, all forecasters have tariff inflation affecting core PCE inflation [and] core CPI inflation this year, without exception. I’m not aware of an exception. So it’s in there. I can’t tell you how much of that it is. In terms of the balance sheet—so, yeah, we—I think—I guess the way I’d say it is, you know, it was the flows in and out of the, the TGA that got us thinking about it, but as we, you know, as we thought about it, we really came to the view that this was a good time to, to make the move that we made. And, broadly, Committee came around—came around to the view that we, we would do the same thing we’d already done, which is, once we—I guess in June, we— was it June? Whenever it was, we, we lowered the pace of QT, and we’re just going to do that again. We’re going to cut it roughly in half. And the sense of that is, if you’re cutting the pace of QT roughly in half, then the runway is probably doubled, okay? So it’s going—it’s going to be slower for longer. And people really liked that. People thought, “That’s, that’s a good idea.” You know, it’s like a plane. You can think of it like a plane coming in for a landing. As we get closer and we—by the way, we still think that reserves are abundant, although you begin to see some of the—some of the things we look at begin to react a little bit, but we still think that they’re abundant. And, of course, now, the TGA is emptying out, so reserves are, are higher now, so you can’t really see the underlying signal. So we came around to the view, and, and it had a lot of appeal, and so we did it. It really—it has no implications at all for monetary policy. It has no implications at all for the ultimate size of the balance sheet. It isn’t sending a signal in any hidden way that you can try to tease out. It’s just not there. We’re, we’re basically—it’s very consistent with our plans and our practices that we’ve published and that we’ve followed since we began this—what is a very successful, you know, rundown of the balance sheet. Again, [this is] the second time that we’ve slowed the pace. And we’ve said that we would stop when we were somewhat above the level [of reserves] we judge as ample. And, clearly, we’re not at that level yet, but we’re going to be approaching it more slowly. It’s a commonsense kind of a— kind of a thing, and it had—it had pretty broad appeal, I will say. . So when we—when we talk about inflation expectations being well anchored, we’re talking about longer run inflation expectations. And they really haven’t moved much, I mean, if at all. There, there’s one reading that everyone’s focusing on that’s higher, but the other survey readings and the market based readings all show relatively, you know, well  anchored inflation expectations. You would expect that expectations of inflation over the course of a year would move around, because conditions change, and in this case, we have tariffs coming in. We don’t know how big, what’s—there’s so many things we don’t know, but we kind of know there are going to be tariffs, and they tend to bring growth down. They tend to bring inflation up at the—in the first instance. So, so I would say, you, you know, I’m not dismissing what we’re seeing in short term inflation expectations. We, as I mentioned, follow that very carefully. But when we say expectations are well anchored, we’re really looking at, you know, longer term, five year and out, and there’s really no story to tell five years and out, either in market based or, or in surveys. But we keep—we’ll watch it. I mean, we’re not, you know, we’re, we’re not going to miss any evidence that longer term or medium term inflation expectations are, are moving. . So that, that has been the case. We talked about that over the course of the last year. There were—there were some good number of months and times when a lot of the job creation was, was concentrated in, you know, educational institutions, health care, state governments, things like that. There were also times when private sector job growth has been moving, moving in a healthy frame—and they’re all—they’re all jobs, but—and remember, we’re, you know, we’re at very low unemployment for, you know, for, for quite a time now. So I, I think it’s a good labor market, but it’s—look, it’s something that we monitor carefully. From our standpoint, employment is employment. But I, you know—the, the elected government is entitled to have—you know, we, we don’t have policies that address different kinds of employment. But, but the elected government has a—has a different role, and they can—they, they can have those. . I think tapering it—I, I don’t know. There’s no plan to do that. You know, at a certain point, we’ll stop runoff. And we may or may not stop MBS runoff, though, because, you know, we can—we can—we, we want to stop runoff in net at some point. We haven’t made any decisions about that, but, you know, we, we want the—we want the MBS to roll off our balance sheet. We really, strongly desire that, so—but we haven’t made any decisions about that, you know. We, we will—we—I think we’d, we’d look carefully at letting that keep going, but hold the overall size of the balance sheet in, you know, constant, at some point—a point that we’re not at yet. . I’m confident that we’re well positioned in the sense that we’re, we’re well positioned to move in the direction we’ll need to move. I, I mean, I, I don’t know anyone who has a lot of confidence in their forecast. I mean, the point is, we are—we are at, you know, we’re at a place where we can cut or we—or we can hold what is a clearly a restrictive stance of policy. And that’s what I mean. I, I mean, I think we’re—that’s well positioned. Forecasting right now, it’s—you know, forecasting is always very, very hard, and in the current situation, I just think it’s—uncertainty is, you know, remarkably high. . I, like, I, I think we’re not going to be in any hurry to move. And, as I mentioned, I think we’re, we’re well positioned to wait for further clarity, and not in any hurry. . Actually, it does not mean either of those things. You know, sometimes with language they—it, it lives its, its useful life, and then we take it off, and we— and, and that was the case there. There’s really not meant to be any signal here. Over the past year, you know, conveying this sense of the balance of risks was important that they be in balance or close to being in balance. That was useful as we approach liftoff, if you remember. But we’re past that. Or, I’m sorry, no—beginning, beginning to cut. So we just—so we just took it out. I, I actually would say that the more important thing now about risks—and this is in, in pages like 10, 11, 12 of the SEP—if you look, participants widely raised their estimate of, of the risks to our—of uncertainty, but also of the risks to growth in our employment and inflation mandates. That’s, that’s a more salient point now than whether they’re—whether they’re in balance. . So financial conditions matter to us because, you know, financial conditions are the main channel to the real economy through which our policy has its effect. So, so they’re important. But what matters from, from a Fed standpoint for the macroeconomy is material changes to overall financial conditions that are persistent, that last for a while—long enough to actually affect economic activity. So that’s what we’re looking for. I, I’m not going to opine on the appropriate level of any market—equity, debt, commodities, or anything like that. And I would just point you to the—to the bigger picture again. You know, the, the real economy, the, the hard data are still in, in reasonably good shape. It’s the soft data—it’s the surveys that are showing, you know, significant concerns, downside risks, and those kind of things. We don’t dismiss that. We’re watching it carefully, but, you know, we, we don’t want to get ahead of that. You know, we, we want to focus on the hard data. This—if it’s—if that’s going to affect the hard data, we should know it very quickly, and, and, of course, we’ll, we’ll understand that. But you don’t see that yet. . Well, fortunately, we’re in a situation where we have seen inflation move down from, you know, higher levels to pretty close to 2 percent, while the unemployment rate has remained very consistent with full employment, 4.1 percent. So we now have inflation coming in from an exogenous source, but the underlying inflationary picture before that was, you know, basically 2½ percent inflation, I would say, and 2 percent growth, and 4 percent unemployment. So, so that’s what—that’s what we did. That’s what, together, the economy accomplished. So I don’t see any reason to think that we’re looking at, at a replay of the ’70s or anything like that. You know, inflation—underlying inflation is, is, you know, still running in the 2s, with probably a little bit of a pickup associated with tariffs. So I, I don’t think we’re facing—I, I wouldn’t say we’re in, in a situation that’s remotely comparable to that. . You know, I—it’s not—it’s not appropriate for me to speculate on political ideas or, or fiscal policy, for that matter. So I’m going to—I’m going to pass on that one. Thank you. . So, since the very beginning, we’ve had kind of a placeholder—the staff has a placeholder of—range of—really a range of possible outcomes from tariffs, and from trade policy generally. And they generally assume full retaliation in those. And so that’s, that’s kind of baked into the numbers. What happens—it will be complicated, and there will be some retaliation and some not and, and all that, but, ultimately, they’re trying to, with the placeholder, give us a broad sense of what this might look like. This—when we know—when we actually know the specifics, we’ll be able to, to have still uncertain but, you know, better informed forecasts. So, so, yes, that’s in there. . Yeah, so we, we looked at pausing, and we looked at, at slowing, and, really, people came together very strongly behind slowing, not pausing, for a variety of reasons. And so people really came to be, you know, pretty strongly in favor of, of this move. It slows down the path and probably lengthens it—you know, doubles it, effectively, by slowing it by half. That’s, that’s—people thought that’s, that’s a good place to be. It’ll, it’ll, you know, help us assure that this path is, is a smooth one as we get closer and closer to that. So that’s how that came about. . You know, it was—it was actually—it was the, the TGA flows— Treasury General Account flows that got us thinking about this. But the more we thought about it, we came around to this. And, and, you know, it, it is—yes, it was provoked. The original discussion was provoked by that. But I think what we came up with, though, was broader than that and different than it. It does address that issue, but it really is also—it fits in really nicely with our principles and our plans, and the things we’ve done before, and the things we’ve said we would do. So that’s why I—you know, pretty, pretty strong support. I’d just say it’s, it’s nothing to do with monetary policy, nothing to do with the size of the balance sheet. It’s just kind of a commonsense adjustment as you get closer and closer. Let’s slow down a little bit again. And, that way, we’ll be more and more confident that we’re getting where we need to get. You can take your time getting there. You know, we’re shrinking the balance sheet every month, and we think that’s—we think it was a good play and, as I mentioned, well supported. Thanks very much.

****FOMCpresconf20250507

. Good afternoon. My colleagues and I remain squarely focused on achieving our dual mandate goals of maximum employment and stable prices for the benefit of the American people. Despite heightened uncertainty, the economy is still in a solid position. The unemployment rate remains low, and the labor market is at or near maximum employment. Inflation has come down a great deal but has been running somewhat above our 2 percent longer  run objective. In support of our goals, today the Federal Open Market Committee decided to leave our policy interest rate unchanged. The risks of higher unemployment and higher inflation appear to have risen, and we believe that the current stance of monetary policy leaves us well positioned to respond in a timely way to potential economic developments. I will have more to say about monetary policy after briefly reviewing economic developments. [Cough] Pardon me. Following growth of 2.5 percent last year, GDP was reported to have edged down in the first quarter, reflecting swings in net exports that were likely driven by businesses bringing in imports ahead of potential tariffs. This unusual swing complicated GDP measurement last quarter. Private domestic final purchases, or PDFP—which excludes net exports, inventory investment, and government spending—grew at a solid 3 percent rate in the first quarter, the same as last year’s pace. Within PDFP, growth of consumer spending moderated while investment in equipment and intangibles rebounded from weakness in the fourth quarter. Surveys of households and businesses, however, report a sharp decline in sentiment and elevated uncertainty about the economic outlook, largely reflecting trade policy concerns. It remains to be seen how these developments might affect future spending and investment. In the labor market, conditions have remained solid. Payroll job gains averaged 155,000 per month over the past three months. The unemployment rate, at 4.2 percent, remains low and has stayed in a narrow range for the past year. Wage growth has continued to moderate, while still outpacing inflation. Overall, a wide set of indicators suggests that conditions in the labor market are broadly in balance and consistent with maximum employment. The labor market is not a source of significant inflationary pressures. Inflation has eased significantly from its highs in mid 2022 but remains somewhat elevated relative to our 2 percent longer run goal. Total PCE prices rose 2.3 percent over the 12 months ending in March  excluding the volatile food and energy categories, core PCE prices rose 2.6 percent. Near term measures of inflation expectations have moved up, as reflected in both market  and survey based measures. Survey respondents, including consumers, businesses, and professional forecasters, point to tariffs as the driving factor. Beyond the next year or so, however, most measures of longer term expectations remain consistent with our 2 percent inflation goal. Our monetary policy actions are guided by our dual mandate to promote maximum employment and stable prices for the American people. At today’s meeting, the Committee decided to maintain the target range for the federal funds rate at 4¼ to 4½ percent and to continue reducing the size of the balance sheet. The new Administration is in the process of implementing substantial policy changes in four distinct areas: trade, immigration, fiscal policy, and regulation. The tariff increases announced so far have been significantly larger than anticipated. All of these policies are still evolving, however, and their effects on the economy remain highly uncertain. As economic conditions evolve, we’ll continue to determine the appropriate stance of monetary policy based on the incoming data, the outlook, and the balance of risks. If the large increases in tariffs that have been announced are sustained, they are likely to generate a rise in inflation, a slowdown in economic growth, and an increase in unemployment. The effects on inflation could be short lived, reflecting a one time shift in the price level. It is also possible that the inflationary effects could instead be more persistent. Avoiding that outcome will depend on the size of the tariffs’ effect—tariff effects, on how long it takes for them to pass through fully into prices, and, ultimately, on keeping longer term inflation expectations well anchored. Our obligation is to keep longer term inflation expectations well anchored and to prevent a one time increase in the price level from becoming an ongoing inflation problem. As we act to meet that obligation, we’ll balance our maximum employment and price stability mandates, keeping in mind that, without price stability, we cannot achieve the long periods of strong labor market conditions that benefit all Americans. We may find ourselves in the challenging scenario in which our dual mandate goals are in tension. If that were to occur, we would consider how far the economy is from each goal, and the potentially different time horizons over which those respective gaps would be anticipated to close. For the time being, we’re well positioned to wait for greater clarity before considering any adjustments to our policy stance. At this meeting, the Committee continued its discussions as part of our five year review of our monetary policy framework. We focused on inflation dynamics and the implications for our monetary policy strategy. Our review includes outreach and public events involving a wide range of parties, including Fed Listens events around the country and a research conference next week. Throughout this process, we’re open to new ideas and critical feedback, and we will take on board lessons of the last five years in determining our findings. We intend to wrap up the review by late summer. The Fed has been assigned two goals for monetary policy—maximum employment and stable prices. We remain committed to supporting maximum employment, bringing inflation sustainably to our 2 percent goal, and keeping longer term inflation expectations well anchored. Our success in delivering on these goals matters to all Americans. We understand that our actions affect communities, families, and businesses across the country. Everything we do is in service to our public mission. We at the Fed will do everything we can to achieve our maximum employment and price stability goals. Thank you. I look forward to your questions. . Well, so, as we noted in our—in our statement—postmeeting statement, we’ve judged that the risks to higher employment and higher inflation have both risen. And this, by the way, of course, is compared to March. So that’s what we can say. I don’t think we can say, you know, which way this will shake out. I think there’s a great deal of uncertainty about, for example, where tariff policies are going to, to settle out and also, when they do settle out, what will be the implications for the economy for growth and for employment. I think it’s too early to know that. So, I mean, ultimately, we think our policy rate is in—is in a good place to stay as we await further clarity on tariffs and, ultimately, their implications for the economy. . I don’t think we know. You know, I think—look where we are today. We have an economy that, if you “look through,” you know, the sort of distortions in Q1 GDP, you’ve still got an economy that looks like it’s growing at a solid pace. The labor market appears to be solid. Inflation is running just a bit above 2 percent. So it’s an economy that’s been resilient and is in good shape, and our policy is sort of modestly or moderately restrictive. It’s 100 basis points less restrictive than it was last fall. And so we think that leaves us in a good place to wait and see. We don’t think we need to be in a hurry. We think we can be patient. We’re going to be watching the data. The data may move quickly or slowly, but we do think we’re in a good position, where we are, to, to let things evolve and become clearer in terms of what should be the monetary policy response. . I think the underlying inflation picture is, is good. It’s what you see, which is inflation now running a bit above 2 percent. And we’ve had basically decent readings in housing services and nonhousing services, which is a big part of it. So that part, I think is, is moving along well. But there’s just so much that we don’t know. I think—and we’re in a good position to wait and see, is the thing. We don’t have to be in a hurry. The economy is—has been resilient and is doing fairly well. Our policy is well positioned. The costs of waiting to see further are fairly low, we think. So that’s what we’re doing. And, you know, we’ll, we’ll see. The Administration is entering into negotiations with many countries over tariffs. We’ll know more with each week and month that goes by where—about where tariffs are going to land—you know, land, and we’ll know what the effects will be when we start to see those things. So we think we’ll be learning. I can’t tell you how long it will take. But, for now, it does seem like it’s, it’s, it’s a fairly clear decision for us to wait and see and watch. . You know, as I said, we’re—we are comfortable with our policy stance. We think the right—we’re in the right place to wait and see how things evolve. We don’t feel like we need to be in a hurry. We feel like it’s appropriate to be patient. And, you know, when things develop—of course, we have a record of—we can move quickly when that’s appropriate. But we think right now, the appropriate thing to do is to wait and see how things evolve. There’s so much uncertainty. If you talk to businesses or market participants or forecasters, everyone is just—is just waiting to see how developments play out, and then we’ll be able to make a better assessment of what the appropriate path for monetary policy is. So we’re not in that place, and, you know, as that develops—and I can’t really give you a time frame on that. . Well, let me say—I mean, so let’s, let’s, let’s look back and see where we are. So, go through 2024 up to the [present] day. We’ve had—we’ve had, you know, unemployment in the low 4s for more than a year, we’ve had inflation coming down in the—now in the mid to low 2s, and we’ve had an economy growing at 2½ percent. So that is—that is the economy as we see it now. What looks likely, given the scope and scale of the tariffs, is that we will see the—certainly, the risks to higher inflation, higher unemployment have increased. And if that’s what we do see, if—and if the tariffs are ultimately put in place at those levels, which we don’t know, then, then we will see—we won’t see further progress toward our goals, but we might see a delay in that. I think in the—you know, in our thinking, we would get—we would never—we never do anything but keep achieving those goals. But what we would—at least for the next, let’s say, year, we would—we would not be making progress toward those goals, again, if that is—if that’s the way the tariffs shake out. The thing is, we don’t know that. There’s so much uncertainty about the scale, scope, timing, and persistence of the tariffs. So that’s that. In terms of preemption, you know, I think you can look back at the 2019 cuts as preemptive. I wouldn’t say that what we did last fall was at all preemptive. If anything, it was a little late. But 2019, we did cut three times. But the situation was, you had a weakening economy, and you had inflation at 1.6 percent. So that’s a situation where you can move preemptively. Now we have inflation running above target. It has been above target for four years. It’s not so far above target now. And we have an expectation conditional on what happens that we’ll see upward pressure on inflation. If you look at where forecasters are, they’re all forecasting an increase in inflation. So it makes it—and then we’ve also got, you know, forecasts of weakening in the economy, and some have recession forecasts. We don’t make a—we don’t make—publish a forecast about, about that. We don’t publish a forecast that assesses how likely a recession is. But, in any case, it’s not a situation where we can be preemptive, because we actually don’t know what the right response to, to the data will be until we see more data. . You know, so first of all, we don’t see that yet, right? We have 4.2 percent unemployment, good participation, wages behaving very well, participation, I mentioned, at a good level. So, you know, with the labor market, we would look at the totality of the—of the data. We’d look at the level of the unemployment rate. We’d look at the speed with which it’s changing. We would look at the whole huge array of labor market data to, to get a sense of whether conditions are really deteriorating or not. And, at the same time, we’d be looking at the other side of the mandate. We could be in a position of having to balance those two things, which is, of course, a very—a difficult balancing judgment that we’d have to make. . It would be a combination of the two. I mean, let’s just say this is a—this would be a complicated and challenging judgment that we would have to make if—and this is—we’re not in this situation, but the situation is if the two goals are in tension. So let’s say that unemployment is moving up in an uncomfortable way and so is inflation—not the situation we’re in—hypothetically. But we would look at how far they are from the goals, how far they’re expected to be from the goals, what’s the expected time to get back to their goals. We’d look at all those things and make a difficult judgment. And that’s in our framework. It’s always been in our thinking. You know, it’s—we haven’t had—we haven’t faced that question in a very long time. And so, again, difficult, difficult judgment to make, and not one that we face today. And we may never face it. But, you know, we have to be keeping it in our thinking now. . You know, it’s going to depend. I think you have to just take a step back and realize this is—this is why we are where we are, is, you know, we are going to need to see how this evolves. There are cases in which it would be appropriate for us to cut rates this year. There are cases in which it wouldn’t, and we just don’t know. Until we know more about how this is going to settle out and what the economic implications are for employment, for—and for, for inflation, I couldn’t confidently say that I know what the appropriate path will be. . Doesn’t affect our—doing our job at all. So we—you know, we’re always going to do the same thing—which is, we’re going to use our tools to foster maximum employment and price stability for the benefit of the American people. We’re always going to consider only the economic data, the outlook, the balance of risks. And that’s it, that’s all we’re going to consider. So it really doesn’t affect either our job or the way we do it. . My gut tells me that uncertainty about the path of the economy is extremely elevated [laughter] and that the downside risks have increased. The risk is—as we pointed out in our statement, the risks—the risks of higher unemployment and higher inflation have risen, but they haven’t materialized yet. They really haven’t. They’re not, really not in the data yet, so that—and that tells me more than by intuition because I think—I think it’s obvious, actually, that the right thing for us to do is to—we’re in a good place. Our policy’s in a very good place, and the right thing to do is, is await further clarity. And I—you know, there’s— usually, things clarify, and that—the appropriate direction becomes clear. That’s what usually happens, right? Right now, it’s very hard to say what that would be. In the meantime, the economy is doing fine. Our policy isn’t—you know, it’s not highly restrictive. It’s somewhat restrictive. It’s 100 basis points less restrictive than it was in, you know, last summer. So we think it’s—we think it’s in a good place, and we think the appropriate thing is for us to wait and see and get more clarity about, about the direction of the economy. . It may well. It just hasn’t shown up yet. And, and, you know, we all look at all these sentiments and read many, many individual comments just to get a better feel. And it—you know, businesses and households very broadly are concerned and, you know, postponing economic decisions of various kinds. And, yes, if that continues and nothing, nothing happens to sort of alleviate those concerns, then you would expect that to begin to show up in economic data. It wouldn’t maybe show up overnight, but it would show up over weeks and months. And that may be what happens, but it hasn’t happened yet. And also, there are things that can happen that will—that will change that narrative. I mean, they haven’t happened, but it’s possible to imagine things. But in the meantime, yes, we’re watching it extremely carefully, like everyone is, but don’t see really much evidence of it in the actual economic data yet. And by the way, consumers keep spending, credit card spending. It’s—you know, it’s still—it’s still a healthy economy, albeit one that is shrouded in some very downbeat sentiment on the part of people and businesses. . Sorry, say that critique again. . Oh, okay. Sure. . So—well, I mean, there are a couple—that’s not really beyond the confines of our mandate. I—look, I would say this: We—you know, we did things—essentially, we were on an emergency footing for a couple of years in the pandemic, and it’s very fair and very welcome for people to look back over what we did and say, “Hey, you could have done this better and different.” And one thing we hear a lot is, we could have explained the QE a little better. We did think we were explaining it in real time. I completely accept the, the thought that we could have explained it better. There’s a lot of thinking that we went on too long with QE. I can tell you that the reason we did was, we were—we were concerned that we didn’t want a tightening of—a sharp tightening in financial conditions at a time when we thought the economy was still vulnerable. And so we did hold on for a long time to QE. And we, of course, tapered and everything. And then we immediately went into QT, and, you know, we’ve—we’re down a couple of trillion. But I get the—that, you know, we, we certainly, with the benefit of hindsight, could have tapered earlier or faster. That’s absolutely right. But this is all very welcome. You know, it’s, it’s—you know, we knew, doing this in real time, that we weren’t going to get it perfect. And those kind of—those kind of, you know, after action kind of looks are essential. And we’re doing the same thing in—you know, in our review, so—on some issues. . So, okay, on climate, you’ve heard me say over and over again that we will not be climate policymakers and that our role on climate is a very, very narrow one. And I think—I think that’s what we’ve done. We’ve done really very little on climate. You can say that was—that little bit that we’ve done was too much. But I wouldn’t want to give any impression that, that, you know, we take—that we’ve taken climate in and it’s something that we’re spending a lot of time and energy on. We’re not. We have very, very narrow things. We did one thing, one guidance for the banks, and then we did one—a one time stress analysis, climate stress analysis, and that’s it. And, you know, we dropped out of the Network for Greening the Financial System. So we didn’t do much on climate, but—and I do think, and I’ve said this publicly several times, I think it’s, it’s a real danger for us to try to take on a mandate like that, which is very narrow application to our work. And, you know, the risk is, if you—if you go for things that are really not on your mandate, you know, then why are you independent? You know, I think that’s a very fair question. And I do think we’ve done a whole lot less on climate than some people seem to think we did. Anyway, that’s what I think. . We didn’t do that. You know, we said—what we said was that we never targeted any unemployment rate for individual racial or demographic groups. What we said was that maximum employment was a broad and inclusive goal. And I think what we meant by that was, we’re going to consider the totality of the country as we look at our maximum  employment goal. Of course, we were never going to target on any individual group with that, but I think some people, you know, wanted to hear it that way. But that’s not at all what we meant. But—so that’s just not a correct reading of our—but I can see how, you know, maybe people found that confusing, and, you know, we have to take that into consideration. . Well, you know, so we really don’t see in the data yet big economic effects. We see—we see sentiment, their concerns that higher prices may be coming, or things like that, but—so people, they’re worried now about inflation. They’re worried about, you know, a shock from the tariffs. But they really haven’t—that shock hasn’t hit yet. Okay, so, you know, we’re going to be looking at not just the sentiment data, but also the real economic data as we assess what it is we should do. And remember, we’re—there will be two effects. One of them would be weakening economy—weakening economic activity, which translates into higher unemployment, and the other would be potentially higher inflation. Again, to say it again, the timing, the scope, the scale, and the persistence of those effects are very, very uncertain. So it’s not at all clear what the appropriate response for monetary policy is at this time. And we’re— you know—and by the way, our policy’s in a good place, so we think we can wait and move when it is clear what the right thing to do is  really not at all clear what it is we should do. So people are feeling stress and concern, but unemployment hasn’t gone up. Job creation is fine. Wages are in good shape. You know, people are not—layoffs are—people are not getting laid off at high levels. You know, initial claims for unemployment are not increasing, you know, in any kind of impressive way. So the economy itself is still, you know, in solid shape. . I don’t have anything more for you on that. I’ve pretty much covered that issue. Thank you. . You know, we don’t do a Summary of Economic Projections at every meeting, as you know. We do it every other meeting. And so this was the meeting when we didn’t do it. And I—you know, we don’t also kind of poll people, so I really—I really wouldn’t want to try to make a specific projection for where we are relative to that. We will—in six weeks, we have the June meeting, and you’ll have another SEP. I’m not going to hazard a guess here today what—as to what it would be. Again, what I would say is that we think our policy rate is in a good place. We think it leaves us well positioned to respond in a timely way to potential developments. That’s where we are, and that—depending on the way things play out, that could include rate hikes—sorry, rate cuts. You know, it could include us holding where we are. We just are going to need to see, you know, how things play out before we make those decisions. . Well, you just captured the—this is the issue with the two goals being in tension. It’s a very challenging question. Now, there can be a case in which one goal is very far—one variable’s very far from its goal, much farther than the other. And if so, you concentrate on that one. And, frankly, that was the case—well, it wasn’t a case where they were really in tension. But if you go back to 2022, it was very clear that we needed to focus on inflation. The labor market was also super tight, so it wasn’t really a tradeoff. You know, if—I think you know what our—what our framework document says. It says we’ll look at how far each goal—each variable is from its goal and also we’ll factor in the time it would take to get there. So, you know, that’s going to be a—potentially, a very difficult judgment. But the data could break in a way that it’s not. You know, I just don’t think we know that. The data could easily favor one or the other. And right now, there’s no way to—no need to make a choice and no real basis for doing so. . You know, we don’t give Congress fiscal advice. I—they’re going to do—we take what they do as a given, and we put it in our models and in our assessment of the economy, so I wouldn’t want to, you know, speculate on that. I mean, I think we do know that the debt is on an unsustainable level—on an unsustainable path—not on an unsustainable level, but an unsustainable path. And it’s on Congress to figure out how to get us back on a sustainable path, and, you know, it’s not up to us to give them advice. . I think they don’t need my advice and our advice on how to do fiscal policy any more than we need their advice on monetary policy. [Laughter] . So it was quite a different situation. What was happening last year is that over the space of six, eight, seven months, the unemployment rate went up by almost a full percentage point, and it was click, click, click, click, click each month. And, you know, everywhere, people were talking about downside risks to the labor market. At the same time, payroll job numbers were getting softer and softer. So there was a really obvious concern about downside risk to the labor market. And so at Jackson Hole and then in September, you know, we wanted to address that forthrightly. We wanted to show that we were there for the—I mean, we had been there for inflation for a couple of years, and we wanted to show also that we’re there for the labor market. And it was important that we send that signal. Fortunately, since then, the labor market has really—and the unemployment rate have really been moving sideways at a level that is, you know, well in the range of mainstream estimates of maximum employment. So that concern has gotten a lot less. So, you know, you’re at 4.2 percent unemployment. I think we were in a very different situation. And now we have a situation where, you know, the risks to higher inflation and higher unemployment have both gone up, as we noted in our statement, and we’ve got to monitor both of those. We actually have a potential situation where there may be a tradeoff or tension between the two potentially. We don’t have it yet, and we may not have it, but that’s what we [may] have, and that’s why I think it’s a very different, different situation. . I can’t give you a—you know, a—I’m not going to try to give you a specific number. I’ll just say, we’ve got—we have to now be looking at both variables and which of them is, is, you know, demanding—if one of them is demanding our focus more than the other, that would tell us what to do with policy. If they’re more or less this, you know, equally distant and equally—or not distant, then we don’t have to make that assessment. You know, the assessment is, you wait. So I’m not going to try to be really specific about what we need to see in terms of the number. But if—look, if we did see, you know, significant deterioration in the labor market, of course that’s one of our two variables, and we would look to be able to support that. You’d hope that it wasn’t also coming at a time when inflation was getting very bad. And, again, we’re speculating here. We don’t know this. We don’t know any of these things. It’s very hypothetical. We’re just going to have to wait and see how the—how it plays out. . So, you know, these are not talks that we’re in any way involved in, so I really can’t comment directly on them. So—but what I will say is this: You know, we had—coming out of the March meeting, we, we—the public generally had an assessment of where tariffs were going. And then April 2 happened, and it was really substantially larger than anticipated in the forecasts that I’ve seen and in our forecast. So—and now we—and now we have a different—we’re in a new phase where—it seems to be we’re entering a new phase where the Administration is entering into beginning talks with a number of our important trading partners. And that’s—that has the potential to change the picture materially or not. And so I think it’s going to be very important how that shakes out. But I—you know, we simply have to wait and see how it works out. It certainly could change the picture, and we’re mindful of not trying to make conclusive judgments about what will happen at a time when the—you know, when the facts are changing. . You know, I don’t want to get my—we’re not—we shouldn’t be involved, even verbally, in questions about the timing of these things. Yes, we’re—of course, we follow all that data. We see the shipping data. We see all that. But, ultimately, this is for the Administration to do. This is—you know, this is their mandate, not ours. And I know they’re— as you can see, they’re, again, having—beginning to have talks with many nations. And that has the potential to change the picture materially, so we’ll just have to wait and see. . The decision we made today? Which decision? . Yes. . Okay, so, I mean, I think we—I think we think that the—you know, there was a big spike in imports—right?—very big, historically large, really, and—to beat tariffs. And now that should actually reverse so that it’s—you know, it’s the difference between—it’s exports minus imports, so—and imports were huge, and so then it conveyed a very negative contribution to U.S. GDP—annualized GDP in the first quarter, as we all know. So that could, in the second quarter, be reversed so that we have, you know, an unusually large contribution to— unusually positive. That’s very likely as imports drop sharply. You could also have—you know, very likely you’ll have restatements of the—of the first quarter. It’ll turn out that consumer spending was higher. It will turn out that inventories were higher. And so you’ll see—you’ll see those data revised up. It may actually go into the third quarter, too. And so I think it’s going— this whole process is going to, a little bit, make it harder to make a clean assessment of U.S. demand. I mentioned private domestic final purchases, which doesn’t have inventories, government, or—inventories, government. Anyway, it’s a cleaner read on private demand. But that, that, too, probably was flattered a little bit by—you know, by strong demand for imports to be tariffed. So that might overstate. It’s a really good reading, 3 percent PDFP in the first quarter. That might actually overstate. So it’s not really going to—I don’t think it’s going to affect our decisions. I will just say, though, that it’s a little confusing and it’s probably less confusing to us than it would be to the general public as we try to explain this. You know, it’s complicated, and, you know, GDP is sending a signal. PDFP is sending a signal. It’s a little bit confusing. But I think we understand what’s going, and it’s not really going to change things for us. . No. I mean, it’s—look, the—look at the state of the economies. The labor market is solid. Inflation is low. We can afford to be patient as things unfold. There’s no real cost to our waiting at this point. Also, the sense of it—the sense of it is, we’re not sure what the right thing will be. You know, there should be some increase in inflation. There should be some increase in unemployment. Those call for different responses. And so until we know— potentially call for different responses—and so, you know, until we know more, we have the ability to wait and see. And it seems to be a pretty clear decision. Everyone on the Committee supported waiting. And so that’s why we’re waiting. . You know, I think, going back a number of years, the link between sentiment data and consumer spending has been weak. It’s not been a strong link at all. On the other hand, we haven’t had a move of this, you know, speed and size. So it wouldn’t be the case that we’re looking at this and just completely dismissing it. But it’s another reason to wait and see. You’re right that we had a couple of years during the pandemic where people were saying—just very downbeat surveys and going out and spending money. So that can happen, and that may happen to some degree here. We just don’t know. This is an outsized change in sentiment, though, and so none of us are looking at this and saying that we’re sure one way or the other. We’re not. . I mean, we don’t have, you know, the kind of tools that are good at dealing with supply chain problems. We don’t have that at all. That’s a—that’s a job for the Administration and for the private sector more than anything. You know, what we can do with our interest rate tool is, we can support—be more or less supportive of demand. And that’s— that’d be a very inefficient way to try to fix supply chain problems. But, you know, we don’t see—we don’t see the inflation yet. We’re, of course, reading the same stories and watching the same data as everybody else. And, you know, right now, we see inflation, you know, kind of moving sideways at a fairly low level. . So I don’t have anything for you on that. My whole focus is on— and my colleagues’ focus is all on, you know, trying to navigate this tricky passage we’re in right now, trying to make the right decisions. You know, we want to make the best decisions for the people that we serve. That’s what we think about day and night. And this is a challenging situation, and that’s, that’s 100 percent of our focus right now. . I’ve never asked for a meeting with any President, and I never will. It’s not—I wouldn’t do that. There’s never a reason for me to ask for a meeting. It’s always been the other way. . I never— . I never—it’s never an initiative that I take. It’s always an initiative—I—you know, I don’t think it’s up to a Fed Chair to seek a meeting with the President, although maybe some have done so. I’ve never done so, and I can’t imagine myself doing that. It’s—I think it’s always—comes the other way: A President wants to meet with you. But that hasn’t happened. . You know, I think once you have a direction—a clear direction, you can make a—we can make a judgment about how fast to move and that kind of thing. So it’s— really, the harder question is the timing, I think, and when will that become clear? And, fortunately, as I mentioned, we have our policy in a good place, the economy’s in a good place, and it’s really appropriate, we think, for us to be patient and wait for things to unfold as we get more clarity about what we should do. Thanks very much.

****FOMCpresconf20250618

. Good afternoon. My colleagues and I remain squarely focused on achieving our dual mandate goals of maximum employment and stable prices for the benefit of the American people. Despite elevated uncertainty, the economy is in a solid position. The unemployment rate remains low, and the labor market is at or near maximum employment. Inflation has come down a great deal but has been running somewhat above our 2 percent longer  run objective. In support of our goals, today the Federal Open Market Committee decided to leave our policy interest rate unchanged. We believe that the current stance of monetary policy leaves us well positioned to respond in a timely way to potential economic developments. I’ll have more to say about monetary policy after briefly reviewing economic developments. Following growth of 2.5 percent last year, GDP was reported to have edged down in the first quarter, reflecting swings in net exports that were driven by businesses bringing in imports ahead of potential tariffs. This unusual swing has complicated GDP measurement. Private domestic final purchases, or PDFP, as we call them—which excludes net exports, inventory investment, and government spending—grew at a solid 2.5 percent rate. Within PDFP, growth of consumer spending moderated, while investment in equipment and intangibles rebounded from weakness in the fourth quarter. Surveys of households and businesses, however, report a decline in sentiment over recent months and elevated uncertainty about the economic outlook, largely reflecting trade policy concerns. It remains to be seen how these developments might affect future spending and investment. In our Summary of Economic Projections, the median participant projects GDP to rise 1.4 percent this year and 1.6 percent next year—somewhat slower than projected in March. In the labor market, conditions have remained solid. Payroll job gains averaged 135,000 per month over the past three months. The unemployment rate, at 4.2 percent, remains low and has stayed in a narrow range for the past year. Wage growth has continued to moderate while still outpacing inflation. Overall, a wide set of indicators suggests that conditions in the labor market are broadly in balance and consistent with maximum employment. The labor market is not a source of significant inflationary pressures. The median projection for the unemployment rate in the SEP is 4.5 percent at the end of this year and next, a bit higher than projected in March. Inflation has eased significantly from its highs in mid 2022 but remains somewhat elevated relative to our 2 percent longer run goal. Estimates based on the consumer price index and other data indicate that total PCE prices rose 2.3 percent over the 12 months ending in May and that—excluding the volatile food and energy categories—core PCE prices rose 2.6 percent. Near term measures of inflation expectations have moved up over recent months, as reflected in both market  and survey based measures. Respondents to surveys of consumers, businesses, and professional forecasters point to tariffs as the driving factor. Beyond the next year or so, however, most measures of longer term expectations remain consistent with our 2 percent inflation goal. The median projection in the SEP for total PCE inflation this year is—is 3 percent, somewhat higher than projected in March. The median inflation projection falls to 2.4 percent in 2026 and 2.1 percent in 2027. Our monetary policy actions are guided by our dual mandate to promote maximum employment and stable prices for the American people. At today’s meeting, the Committee decided to maintain the target range for the federal funds rate at 4¼ to 4½ percent and to continue reducing the size of our balance sheet. We will continue to determine the appropriate stance of monetary policy based on the incoming data, the evolving outlook, and the balance of risks. Changes to trade, immigration, fiscal, and regulatory policies continue to evolve, and their effects on the economy remain uncertain. The effects of tariffs will depend, among other things, on their ultimate level. Expectations of that level, and thus of the related economic effects, reached a peak in April and have since declined. Even so, increases in tariffs this year are likely to push up prices and weigh on economic activity. The effects on inflation could be short lived—reflecting a one time shift in the price level. It’s also possible that the inflationary effects could instead be more persistent. Avoiding that outcome will depend on the size of the tariff effects, on how long it takes for them to pass through fully into prices, and, ultimately, on keeping longer term inflation expectations well anchored. Our obligation is to keep longer term inflation expectations well anchored and to prevent a one time increase in the price level from becoming an ongoing inflation problem. As we act to meet that obligation, we will balance our maximum employment and price stability mandates, keeping in mind that, without price stability, we cannot achieve the long periods of strong labor market conditions that benefit all Americans. We may find ourselves in the challenging scenario in which our dual mandate goals are in tension. If that were to occur, we would consider how far the economy is from each goal and the potentially different time horizons over which those respective gaps would be anticipated to close. For the time being, we are well positioned to wait to learn more about the likely course of the economy before considering any adjustments to our policy stance. In our SEP, FOMC participants wrote down their individual assessments of an appropriate path for the federal funds rate, based on what each participant judges to be the most likely scenario going forward. The median projection projects—participant—median participant projects that the appropriate level of the federal funds rate will be 3.9 percent at the end of this year, the same as projected in March. The median projection declines to 3.6 percent at the end of next year and to 3.4 percent at the end of 2027, a little higher than the March projection. These individual forecasts are always subject to uncertainty, and, as I have noted, uncertainty is unusually elevated. And, of course, these projections are not a Committee plan or decision. At this meeting, the Committee continued its discussions as part of our five year review of our monetary policy framework. We focused on issues related to assessing the risks and uncertainties that are relevant for monetary policy and the potential implications for policy strategy and communications. Our review includes outreach and public events involving a wide range of parties, including Fed Listens events around the country and a research conference that we held last month. We are open to new ideas and critical feedback, and we will take on board lessons of the last five years in determining our findings. We intend to wrap up any modifications to our Statement on Longer Run Goals and Monetary Policy Strategy by late summer. After that, we will consider enhancements to our suite of communications tools, including the SEP. The Fed has been assigned two goals for monetary policy: maximum employment and stable prices. We remain committed to supporting maximum employment, bringing inflation sustainably to our 2 percent goal, and keeping longer term inflation expectations well anchored. Our success in delivering on these goals matters to all Americans. We understand that our actions affect communities, families, and businesses across the country. Everything we do is in service to our public mission. And we at the Fed will do everything we can to achieve our maximum employment and price stability goals. Thank you. I look forward to your questions. . So we’ve had three months of, of favorable inflation readings since the high readings of January and February, and that’s, of course, highly welcome news. Part of that just is that services, core services—both housing services and nonhousing services have really been grinding down toward levels that are—that are consistent with 2 percent inflation. So that’s the good news. We’ve had goods inflation just moving up a bit, and, of course, we expect—as you—as you point out, we, we do expect to see more of that over the course of the summer. It takes some time for tariffs to work their way through the chain of distribution to the end consumer. A good example of that would be, goods being sold at retailers today may have been imported several months ago—before tariffs were imposed—so we’re beginning to see some effects. And we do expect to see more of them over coming months. We do—we do also see price increases in some of the relevant categories like personal computers and audio visual equipment—things like that that are attributable to tariff increases. In addition, we look at surveys of businesses, and there, there are many of those. And, and, you, you do see a range of things, but, but many, many companies do expect to—to, to put all or—some or all of the effect of tariffs through to the next, next person in the—in the chain and, ultimately, to the consumer. Today—you know, the amount of these—the, the amount of the tariff effects, the size of the tariff effects, their duration, and the time it will take are all highly uncertain. So that, that is why we think the appropriate thing to do is to hold where we are as we learn more, and we think our policy stance is, is in a good place—where we’re well positioned to react to incoming developments. . So if you look at the forecast, you will see that people do generally expect inflation to move up and then to come back down. But we can’t just assume that. Of course, we don’t know that, and, you know, our, our job is to make sure—one of our jobs—to make sure that a one time increase in inflation doesn’t turn into an inflation problem. And that, again—that will depend on the size of the effects, how long it takes for them to come in, and, and, ultimately, on, on keeping inflation expectations anchored. . So I would focus most on the—on the nearer term. As you think—as you get out to the—to the later years, it’s hard to—it’s hard for anybody to know where the economy is going. You didn’t see people moving their longer term, you know, estimate of the neutral rate, for example, at this meeting. So—and those things are probably slow moving. So I think—I think if you look at what’s happening here since March—this is since March, right?— you see a little slower growth, just a tiny tick up, one tenth tick up, in, in unemployment, and you see inflation moving up three tenths. And by the way, it was—it was a similar move from the December SEP to the March. So that’s what you see. You see the, the effects of tariffs. I think we learned in April, after the March meeting, that substantially higher tariffs were likely, and then since then, the estimates of where the tariffs will be have actually moved back down, although still at an elevated level. So we’re adapting in real time, and what you see is, you know, an, an accumulation of individual assessments. . So what we said was that uncertainty has, has—uncertainty about the economic outlook has diminished but remains elevated. Many, many surveys say that. They do. So—and, and, that’s—that’s actually a line from the Tealbook, which you can see in five years. Remember to check that. [Laughter] . No—but if you think of that, tariff uncertainty—uncertainty really peaked in April and since then has come down. And that’s—that’s really what that’s just acknowledging. It’s diminished but still elevated—that it’s uncertainty. So I think that’s an accurate statement. . So we do—we do, of course, monitor all those things. I, I think if you look at the overall picture, you know, what you’re seeing is 4.2 percent unemployment and an economy that’s growing at a—at a rate hard to know, given the, the unusual flows in the first quarter. But it appears to be 1½, 2 percent—maybe a little better than that. Sentiment has come up off of its very low levels. It’s still—it’s still depressed. So, you know, you can—you can point to things—the housing market is a longer run problem and also a short run problem. I don’t think it’s indicative of—you know, basically, the situation is, we have a longer run shortage of housing, and we also have high rates right now. I think the best thing we can do for the housing market is to restore price stability in a sustainable way and, and create a strong labor market, and that’s the best thing we can do for the housing market. You asked about the job market—again, look at labor force participation. Look at wages. Look at job creation. They’re all at healthy levels now. I, I would say you can see perhaps a very, very slow continued cooling, but nothing that’s troubling at this time. But, you know, we watch it—we watch it very, very carefully. So, overall, again, the current stance of monetary policy leaves us well positioned to respond in a timely way to economic developments, and—for now—and we’ll be watching the data carefully. . So this is very much the conversation we had today and yesterday. There, there are many, many different scenarios—many combinations of scenarios where inflation does or doesn’t prove out to be at the levels we think and where the labor market does or doesn’t soften. And I think what, what you see people doing is looking ahead at a time of very high uncertainty and writing down what they think the most likely case is. No one holds these, these rate paths with a great deal of conviction, and everyone would agree that they’re all going to be data dependent. And that—you can make a case for, for any of the rate paths, I think, that you see in, in the SEP. And, you know, we do this once a quarter. It’s—it’s a hard thing to do at this—particularly at this time. But it does reflect—you know, if you see somebody writing down, you know, a, a rate path that involves cuts, that’s them saying, “Yes, I think we will get to a place, more likely than not, where cuts will be appropriate.” And it could be—it could be a joint probability of a number of possible outcomes. Again, remember how much uncertainty we face, though. . So it’s—it’s—again, it’s very, very hard to say when that will happen. We know that the time will come  it come—could come quickly. It could not come quickly. As long as the economy is solid, though—as long as we’re seeing the kind of labor market that we have and reasonably decent growth and inflation moving down, we feel like the right thing to do is to be where we are, with where our policy stance is, and just learn more. And in particular, we feel like we’re going to learn a great deal more over the summer on tariffs. We do—we hadn’t expected them to show up much by now, and they haven’t, and we will see whether—the extent to which they do over, over coming months. And I think that’s going to inform our thinking, for one thing. In addition, we’ll see how the labor market progresses. So, at some point, it will become clear. I can’t tell you exactly when that will be. And, you know, meanwhile, we’ll be watching, watching the labor market very carefully for signs of weakness and strength and tariffs for signs of, of what’s going to happen there. And, of course, there are many developments ahead, you know, even in the near term—developments are expected on tariffs. So I think we, we don’t yet know with any confidence where they will settle out. We have an estimate, and it’s a pretty—I think all estimates are now pretty close together. But it’s— it’s, yeah, highly uncertain. . Yeah, what you start with is, is—what’s the effective tariff rate overall? And people are managing to that. But, you know, the, the pass through of tariffs to consumer price inflation is a whole process that’s very uncertain. You know, as you know, there are many parties in that chain: There’s the manufacturer, the exporter, the importer, the retailer, and the consumer, and each one of those is going to be trying not to be the one to, to pay for the tariff. But together, they will all pay for it together—or maybe one party will pay it all. But that process is very hard to predict, and we haven’t been through a situation like this, and I think we have to be humble about our ability to forecast it. So that’s why we need to see some actual data to have—to make better decisions. We, we’d like to get some, some more data, and, and, again, in the meantime, we can do that because the economy remains in solid condition. . So you’re right, we—and, as is often the case, we have a pretty healthy diversity of views on the Committee. We did have strong support for today’s decision and broad agreement that our policy stance does leave us in a good place. But I would point to two factors, and you mentioned them. The first is just that parties have a diversity of forecasts, and, and they do align with, with where—with where their dots are. So if you have a higher inflation forecast, you’re going to be less likely to be writing down, you know, more, more cuts. But as—remember, as we see more data, we’re going to learn more about where inflation is headed. And that means when it is time to look at, at normal—at sort of, at, you know— resuming our normalization process, the differences you may—you see should be smaller because we’ll have seen actual data. Right now, it’s just a forecast in a very foggy time. So that’s the first part—is forecast. Secondly, people can look at the same data, and they can evaluate the risks differently, as you know. And that includes, you know, the, the risk of higher inflation, the risk it’ll be more persistent, the risk that the labor market will weaken—people are going to have different assessments of that risk. So you put that in there, too. So those are the two ways that, that—the two things, I think, that drive these things. Remember, though, with—as I mentioned earlier— with uncertainty as elevated as it is, no one holds these rate paths with a lot of conviction. So that’s really where it is. It’s a function of those things, and I think as the data come in, you should see those differences diminish. . So if you just look backward at the data, that, that’s what you would say, but that’s not—we have to be forward looking. And the thing that every forecaster—every outside forecaster and the Fed is saying is that we expect a meaningful amount of inflation to arrive in coming months, and we have to take that into account. So I think a backward looking look would, would lead you to a neutral stance. But we, we can’t—we have to—we have to look at that. And because the economy is still solid, we can take the time to actually see what’s going to happen. It, it’s, you know, the—there’s a range of possibilities on how, how large the, the inflation effects and the other effects are going to be. So we’ll make smarter and better decisions if we just wait a couple of months or however long it takes to get a sense of, of really what, what is going to be the pass through of inflation and what’re—what’s going to be the effects on spending and on hiring and all those things. . Okay, from my standpoint, it’s—it’s not complicated. What everyone on the FOMC wants is a good, solid American economy with a strong labor market and, and price stability. That’s what we want. We think our policy is well positioned to—right now to, to deliver that and, and to be able to respond in a timely way as the data lead us around. The economy’s been resilient, and part of that is our stance, and, again, we think we’re—we’re in a good place on that to respond to significant economic developments. That’s what matters. That is what matters to us—pretty much, that’s all that matters to us. . I’m—I’m not thinking about that. I’m thinking about this. . Sorry, sorry—with what picking up? . Ah, ah, immigration—so you’re asking immigration? . Yeah, you know—I, I wouldn’t want to speculate. What—one way to get at that from an economic standpoint—we, of course, don’t comment on immigration policy. It’s not ours to make or comment on. But what you see is a—an, an unemployment rate that has been really solid and at a low level—not really increasing. It’s been in a—in a good range and well within the range of mainstream estimates of maximum employment. And that means, like, part of that is that labor demand and labor supply are kind of moving down at the same rate. Labor demand is, is softening—you see that in job creation—but it’s still kind of at a healthy level. And labor supply is, is diminishing because the, the immigration numbers that we see are, are much lower than they were. So the—those two factors, supply and demand—that’s what has kept the, the unemployment rate in a reasonably, you know, stable place. . So the framework review really has two tracks, right? The first track is our—is our policy framework. That, that is reflected in the consensus statement. And we, we’ve said that we would finish that and announce it by the end of the summer. So we’re well along in that process. We’ve had the meetings that we need to have, and we’re now going to be going into [cough]—pardon me—into discussions about, you know, specific changes to language. So that’s—that’s the framework part of it. The second part of it is our communications tools and practices [cough]—pardon me—and that, that part comes next, okay? That’s what we’re going to do in the meetings this fall. Actually, what we did at this meeting, though, is we, we sort of prepared the ground for that. We had a—we had a meeting where we talked at a high level about a number of ideas. The SEP is part of it—you know, other—many, many other ideas. It’s—it’s sort of— how do we think our communications can be improved? There are a number of ideas. People offered a really—it was a great conversation. Number of ideas—but we’re—we’re going to look at those with staff briefing and a lot of thought in the fall. And I would say, when it comes to changing communications, you know, I would only do—I would only support things really that only—implement things that have very broad support. And also, you want to be really careful, because I think our communications are pretty well received. They’re not broken, so more is not necessarily better—but better is better. So we’re going to be looking at ways to do—to do things that will improve the clarity of what we do for the benefit of, of the public. . Well, the, the forecast for inflation in December was 2½ core PCE for 2025—the forecast was 2½ percent—which is a good inflation forecast. I think what we’ve learned is that—and this was long before we had any idea of what the actual policies would be. We’ve learned the tariffs are going to be substantially larger than, than forecasters generally thought. And, you know, we, we don’t—our, our forecasts are generally not particularly different from those of other, you know, well resourced forecasting operations. So what we learned—and particularly in April—was that substantially larger tariffs were coming and that that would mean higher inflation. That’s what happened. And so you—now you see—you saw 2½ percent forecast in December. You saw 2.8 percent in March, and you see 3.1 percent now. So it’s six tenths higher inflation for 2025, and that’s—that’s a big part of, of the change. And that’s—that’s due to the effects of, of the tariffs that are—you know, we, we don’t know where they’re going to land, but it’s pretty apparent they’re going to land higher than outside forecasters were really guessing at the end of last year. KELLY O’GRADY. My follow up to that—I think consumers—right?—were looking for relief on rates when it comes to mortgages—car loans. Small businesses want to take out more manageable loans. When you look at the cumulative inflation over the past five years, prices have risen over 20 percent—it’s been a rough road. So what is the tipping point, then, for the wait and see approach in terms of how much it’s going to help versus when it hurts the American consumer? . Well, I mean, we’re trying to restore price—the best thing we can do for the—for the public that we serve is restore price stability. If we can, and we will, restore price stability, meaning 2 percent inflation on a durable, sustainable basis—that and also maximum employment—and if we, we restore those things, that’s the best thing. And that is our goal. The best thing we can do for the American people—for, for households and businesses— that is the ultimate thing that we can deliver. And they can make their decisions without having to think about inflation all the time. So, in the meantime, we have to keep rates high to keep—to get inflation all the way down. They’re not very high—let’s be honest. I would say policy is modestly or moderately—probably modestly now—restrictive. If you look at the economy, it’s not performing as though it were performing under very strict monetary policy—very restrictive monetary policy. So I would say probably modestly restrictive—and so what it will take is, is confidence that inflation is coming down. Now, I would say, without tariffs, that confidence would be building because if you—if you see what’s happening with nonhousing services and housing services, which are the other two big pieces other than goods, those are coming down really nicely now. So I think we have to learn a little more about, about tariffs. I don’t know—I don’t know what the right way for us to react will be. I think it’s hard to know with, with any confidence how we should react until we see, really, the size of the effects—then we can start to make a better judgment. So that’s what we’re doing, and I think we can—we can take the time to do that, because unemployment is 4.2 percent. Wages are moving up. Real wages are moving up at a—at a healthy clip now. And inflation is, you know—2.3 percent headline inflation over a 12 month basis. So it’s a good economy, and a solid economy with decent growth. . I’m not—I’m not saying that at all. You know, from our standpoint, what I can say is that the, the U.S. economy is in solid shape. Inflation has come down. The unemployment rate remains at 4.2 percent. As I mentioned, real wages are moving up. It’s a— it’s a good—job creation is at a healthy level. Unemployment, again, as I said, low—labor force participation at a good place. What we’re waiting for to reduce rates is, is to understand what will happen with, with, really, the tariff inflation. And there’s a lot of uncertainty about that. Every forecaster you can name who, you know—who is a professional, you know, forecaster with, with adequate resources and forecasts for a living is forecasting, you know, a pretty significant—everyone that I know is forecasting a meaningful increase in inflation in coming months from tariffs because someone has to pay for the tariffs. And it will be someone in that chain that I mentioned: Between the manufacturer, the exporter, the importer, the retailer— ultimately, somebody putting it into a, a good of some kind or just the consumer buying it—and, you know, all through that, that chain, people will be trying not to be the ones who, who pick up the cost. But, ultimately, the cost of the tariff has to be paid. And some of it will fall on the end consumer. We know that because that’s what businesses say—that’s what the, the data say from past—so we know that’s coming. And we just want to see, see a little bit of that before we make judgments prematurely. . No, I mean, you’re—monetary policy has to be forward looking. That is elementary. You’ve got to be looking—I always—we always talk about the incoming data, the evolving outlook, and the balance of risks. We say that over and over and over again, right? So it’s always forward looking. You know, if you know—at the very beginning of the pandemic, you know, we cut rates to zero immediately. Nothing had happened. We just knew that it was going to be really bad, right? So we took very aggressive forward looking—because we knew things were going to be unusually difficult. So, of course, this, this is something we, we sort of know is coming—we just don’t know the size of it. And, again, the economy seems to be in solid shape. So the labor market’s not crying out for a rate cut. Businesses, you know, were in a bit of shock after April 2. But you see business sentiment—you talk to business people now—there’s a very different feeling now that people are working their way through this. And they, they understand how they’re going to go, and it’s—it, it feels much more positive and constructive than it did three months ago, let’s say. So, again, we think that our current stance of monetary policy is in a good place. . I don’t see them at all as, as in tension. You know, so I was asked, “Is the Fed overstaffed?” And I said, “No.” You know, and I sort of said as a pun, “Overworked, but not overstaffed.” People do work extremely hard at the Fed, and I know they work hard at Bloomberg, too. [Laughter] So—but we do. We work hard. But I would say this—so we are careful stewards of public resources, and sometimes you need to show that. So there’ve been several times in our history—modern history—where the Fed has said, “You know what? We’re going to do a buyout. We’re going to—going to show the public. We’re going to demonstrate that we are good stewards of public resources.” So we thought—and I, I thought— that this is a time when we can. You know, we’ve—we grow about—our headcount has grown at about 1 percent a year. So over the course of a couple of years, we’re going to—we’re doing a careful scrub of the Board and all of the Reserve Banks, and we’re going to find 10 percent of employees who can do something else. Where, where we can—we can streamline our operations—and we, we think we can get there in a year, in a couple of years. We think we can do that. And we think the—we think the, the—this is, this is without taking risk to carrying out our critical missions. So this is something you do very carefully—thoughtfully. And you do it, again, respecting that we have critical missions to carry out. I’ve had experience—a lot of experience—in my prior careers, you know, with headcount reductions and things like that, and this is how you do it professionally. You do it carefully—thoughtfully—with a lot of planning, and you do it over a period of time. And I, I think it’s—I think the Fed will be fine. I think no one will notice any decline in our ability to carry out our missions, and I think it’s just us wanting to demonstrate to the public that we are actually good stewards of their—of their resources. We’re—we’re effectively wiping out 10 years of headcount growth with this. So, I mean, we just—we wanted to show that, you know—that we’re good stewards. . We’re just at the very beginning. As you know, we’re doing a buyout program. We’re going to—we’re going to hit that goal. I think many organizations find that they can—that they can do this. You don’t want to do it every year or anything, but you can do it at intervals. And you, you wind up not, you know—not interfering with your ability to perform your jobs. . Yeah, so, you know, we don’t—we don’t sit around and debate or really discuss—we, we take fiscal policy as fully exogenous. And so we, we actually, you know, really didn’t talk about, about the bill or the contents of it. It’s still evolving. You know, when, when it gets close—closer—remember also we have a very, very large economy, and that the effects will be at the margin. And, you know, I, I expect that they’ll—they may already be in— but they will be in by the next meeting. We’ll make an estimate. But it’s not a major thing  it’s nothing that we discuss. It, it may have been mentioned a couple of times—but as something that’s coming in. But I think the outcome is—you know, we don’t know the outcome yet there—so, hard to be real specific. . You know, two things—one, the data we get right now—we, we can do our jobs. I’m not concerned that we can’t do our jobs. That’s not the—that’s not the point. The point, really, is that we are starting to see, you know, layoffs. And, and important gatherers of data are saying that they’re—they’re having to cut back on the size of their surveys. That’s going to lead to more volatility in the surveys. I think we should take a step back. And, you know, from our standpoint—and I think the standpoint of businesses and governments and everyone—having really good data on the state of the economy at any given time is a huge public good. It helps. It doesn’t just help the Fed. It helps the government, it helps Congress, it helps the executive branch. More importantly, really, it helps businesses. They need to know what’s going on in the economy. The United States has been a leader for many, many years in this whole project of measuring and understanding what’s happening in, in our very large and dynamic economy. And I hate to see—I hate to see us cutting back on that because it, it is a real benefit to the general public that people in all kinds of jobs have the best possible understanding of what’s happening in the economy and, and, hence, what’s likely to happen. It’s very hard to measure what’s going on in the U.S. economy. If, if you read—there was a book called—well, it’s really remarkable how many things you need to understand to estimate U.S. GDP. Very, very difficult—and it’s so important that we get it right. I just would—I just would say it’s not a place to—I would want to keep investing in that, you know, for the good of the general public. . You know, the framework goes back to—the framework document goes back to 2012, and it’s—it’s the Committee’s document. It’s not like we’re going to invent a brand new way to do things. It’s—it’s been an evolving document, so it shouldn’t depend on who the Chair is at all. It should depend on what’s happening in the economy and what the Committee wants to do. So, yeah, it isn’t really tied to any particular Chair, and, you know, we used to renew it every year. Now we do it every five years. So—but I, I don’t think anybody— I’ve never heard anyone raise this issue that, you know, a new Chair might want to come in and go in a completely different direction. I really—I really don’t think that’s right. But, you know, that’s not—not going to be up to me to decide. . No, not at all. Not in any way. . So, of course, we’re watching—like everybody else is—what’s going on. I really don’t have any comment on that. You know, possible that, that we’ll see higher energy prices—what’s tended to happen is, when there’s turmoil in the Middle East, you may see a spike in energy prices—but tends to come down. Those things don’t generally tend to have lasting effects on inflation, although, of course, in the 1970s, they famously did, because you had a series of very, very large shocks. But we haven’t seen anything like that—that—like that now. The U.S. economy is far less dependent on foreign oil than it was back in the 1970s. So, but— . So this is the question. The question really is, will AI be more augmenting labor or replacing labor? And I wouldn’t—I, I—we all see those announcements, including one today. I wouldn’t overread a, a couple of data points, because, you know, AI should be creating jobs at the same time. It may be replacing—it may be doing both. Anyone who’s done any work with it—with AI—will, will have been a little bit stunned at how capable it is. And it’s just a different thing. So I think this is something that certainly has transformational potential—and probably we’re in the very early stages of it. They say what you’re seeing now compared to what you’ll see in two years is, is going to be very different and even more effective. So I think it’s really hard to know. You know, of course, there are optimists who feel like it’s going to make everybody much more, you know—much more productive. And there are those who think it’s going to replace an awful lot of jobs right across the income spectrum—you know, white collar, blue collar, and everything. So I just don’t know. We don’t—we don’t have a “house view” on that. But this is—this is going to be a very important question for some time. . It’s—it’s certainly a time of real change—you know, from a geopolitical standpoint, from a trade standpoint, from an immigration standpoint—you see this not just here, but everywhere. So there’s—there’s quite a lot going on. It doesn’t change the way we do monetary policy in the near term. I mean, but—and it doesn’t change our objectives or what we need to do. And, you know, these, these things are not really our issues—they’re really issues for elected governments. All of those issues are really for elected governments. But there’s no question it’s a time of, of real, real change—and very hard to see where that goes. Will it be—there have been many, many things written about how it’s going to be a more inflationary time. That’s possible  it’s not guaranteed. You know, AI could cut in a very other direction. AI could make people much more productive and—and push in the other direction. I don’t know, though. So you’re right, but, honestly, our focus is, is a much more practical one, and that is, how do we keep inflation low and, and employment high in the near term? That’s really what we’re about. . I don’t, you don’t see—you don’t really see unemployment going up. You don’t see increased slack, really—I mean, at the margin. Remember, you’re at 4.2 percent unemployment. That, that was for many, many years—that was an extremely low level. It happens to have come up off of an even lower level. As we came out of the pandemic, we were as low as 3.4 percent. But 4.2 percent is probably at the low end of estimates of the longer run, you know, sustainable level of natural rate of unemployment. So I wouldn’t—I guess I wouldn’t agree with that. And also, in terms of wages—you know, real wages after inflation have been moving up sort of more than was consistent with 2 percent inflation. They’re still moving up at a—at a healthy clip—and I think much more consistent with 2 percent inflation, given, given a, a reasonable assessment of, of trend productivity. So it’s a pretty good labor market. You know, you’re right that the level of job creation has come down, but so has the supply of workers—the change in the supply—the, the new supply. So you’ve seen—you’ve seen the unemployment rate remain pretty stable at 4.2. It’s been as high as 4.3, but, you know, those are—those are good numbers. So it’s a pretty good labor market. There’s—the thing is, there’s—a more concerning thing is, there’s not—there are not a lot of layoffs, but there are not a lot of, of job creation. The number—if you’re out of work, it’s—it’s hard to find a job. But very few people are being laid off at this point. So that’s—an equilibrium we watch very, very carefully, because if there were to be, you know, significant layoffs and the job finding rate were to remain this low, you would have a lot—you would have an increase in unemployment fairly quickly. But that hasn’t happened. It really hasn’t happened. We’re—so the U.S. economy has defied all kinds of forecasts for it to, to weaken, really, over the last three years, and it’s been remarkable to see—just again and again when people think it’s going to weaken out. Eventually it will, but we don’t see signs of that now. . So there are a number of people on the Committee who wrote down no cuts this year but some cuts next year. So, look, I think, you know, people are writing down their most likely path, right? They’re not saying there’s zero possibility of other things, really. Really, it’s—think of it as the least unlikely path in a situation like this where uncertainty is very high. I, I think—again, people write—they write down their, their rate paths, and they do not have, like, a really high conviction that this is exactly what’s going to happen over the next two years. No one feels that way about their rate path. They feel like, “What am I going to write down?” I mean, what would you write down? It’s not easy to, to be—to do that with confidence. So I would just say it that way. We don’t rule things in or out—certainly, a hike is not the base case at all. It’s not something people are writing down. But, in the meantime, we do the best we can with these forecasts, and I, I think they’re—they’re representative of, you know, of the different forecasts and different reaction functions that people on the Committee have. So thank you very much. Thanks.

****FOMCpresconf20250730

. Good afternoon. My colleagues and I remain squarely focused on achieving our dual mandate goals of maximum employment and stable prices for the benefit of the American people. Despite elevated uncertainty, the economy is in a solid position. The unemployment rate remains low, and the labor market is at or near maximum employment. Inflation has been running somewhat above our 2 percent longer run objective. In support of our goals, today the Federal Open Market Committee decided to leave our policy interest rate unchanged. We believe that the current stance of monetary policy leaves us well positioned to respond in a timely way to potential economic developments. I will have more to say about monetary policy after briefly reviewing economic developments. Recent indicators suggest that growth of economic activity has moderated. GDP rose at a 1.2 percent pace in the first half of this year, down from 2.5 percent last year. Although the increase in the second quarter was stronger at 3 percent, focusing on the first half of the year helps smooth through the volatility in the quarterly figures related to the unusual swings in net exports. The moderation in growth largely reflects a slowdown in consumer spending. In contrast, business investment in equipment and intangibles picked up from last year’s pace. Activity in the housing sector remains weak. In the labor market, conditions have remained solid. Payroll job gains averaged 150,000 per month over the past three months. The unemployment rate, at 4.1 percent, remains low and has stayed in a narrow range over the past year. Wage growth has continued to moderate while still outpacing inflation. Overall, a wide set of indicators suggests that conditions in the labor market are broadly in balance and consistent with maximum employment. Inflation has eased significantly from its highs in mid 2022 but remains somewhat elevated relative to our 2 percent longer run goal. Estimates based on the consumer price index and other data indicate that total PCE prices rose 2.5 percent over the 12 months ending in June and that, excluding the volatile food and energy categories, core PCE prices rose 2.7 percent. These readings are little changed from the beginning of the year, although the underlying composition of price changes has shifted: Services inflation has continued to ease, while increased tariffs are pushing up prices in some categories of goods. Near term measures of inflation expectations have moved up, on balance, over the course of this year on news about tariffs, as reflected in both market based and survey based measures. Beyond the next year or so, however, most measures of longer term expectations remain consistent with our 2 percent inflation goal. Our monetary policy actions are guided by our dual mandate to promote maximum employment and stable prices for the American people. At today’s meeting, the Committee decided to maintain the target range for the federal funds rate at 4¼ to 4½ percent and to continue reducing the size of our balance sheet. We will continue to determine the appropriate stance of monetary policy based on the incoming data, the evolving outlook, and the balance of risks. Changes to government policies continue to evolve, and their effects on the economy remain uncertain. Higher tariffs have begun to show through more clearly to prices of some goods, but their overall effects on economic activity and inflation remain to be seen. A reasonable base case is that the effects on inflation could be short lived—reflecting a one time shift in the price level. But it is also possible that the inflationary effects could instead be more persistent, and that is a risk to be assessed and managed. Our obligation is to keep longer term inflation expectations well anchored and to prevent a one time increase in the price level from becoming an ongoing inflation problem. For the time being, we are well positioned to learn more about the likely course of the economy and the evolving balance of risks before adjusting our policy stance. We see our current policy stance as appropriate to guard against inflation risks. We are also attentive to risks on the employment side of our mandate. In coming months, we will receive a good amount of data that will help inform our assessment of the balance of risks and the appropriate setting of the federal funds rate. At this meeting, the Committee continued its discussions as part of our five year review of our monetary policy framework. We focused on potential revisions to our Statement on Longer Run Goals and Monetary Policy Strategy and are on track to wrap up any modifications by late summer. The Fed has been assigned two goals for monetary policy—maximum employment and price—stable prices. We remain committed to supporting maximum employment, bringing inflation sustainably to our 2 percent goal, and keeping longer term inflation expectations well anchored. Our success in delivering on these goals matters to all Americans. We understand that our actions affect communities, families, and businesses across the country. Everything we do is in service to our public mission. We at the Fed will do everything we can to achieve our maximum employment and price stability goals. Thank you. I look forward to your questions. . So, as you know, today we decided to leave our policy rate where it’s been, which—where I would characterize as modestly restrictive. Inflation is running a bit above 2 percent, as I mentioned, even excluding tariff effects. The labor market’s solid— historically low unemployment. Financial conditions are accommodative, and the economy is not—the economy is not performing as though restrictive policy were holding it back inappropriately. So it seems to, to me and to almost the whole Committee that the economy is not performing as though restrictive policy is holding it back inappropriately, and modestly restrictive policy seems appropriate. All that said, there’s also downside risk to the labor market. In coming months, we’ll receive a good amount of data that will help inform our assessment of the balance of risks and the appropriate setting of the federal funds rate. . So you’re right. We do have—this is an, an, an intermeeting period when we’ll get two full rounds of employment and inflation data before the time of the September meeting. We have made no decisions about September—we don’t do that in advance. We’ll be taking that information into consideration and all the other information we get as we make our decision at the September meeting. . So, essentially, the statement in the—in the—in our statement about uncertainty reflects what’s gone on since the last meeting. So, at the time of the last meeting, uncertainty had, had, had moved down a little bit, but it was more or less even this time. So we took out, you know, “had diminished” because it didn’t diminish further. So there’s not really much in that. And then your second question is—say again? . No, I think we’re still—so you’re right, it’s been a very dynamic time for these trade negotiations, and lots and lots of events in the intermeeting period, but we’re still, you know, a ways away from seeing where things settle down. We are clearly getting more and more information. And, you know, I think at this point, people’s estimates, our estimates, outside estimates of the—of the likely, you know, effective, effective level of tariffs is, is not moving around that much at this point. But at the same time, there are many, many uncertainties left to resolve. So, yes, we are learning more and more. It doesn’t feel like we’re very close to the end of that process. And that’s, that’s not for us to judge, but it does—it feels like there’s much more to come, you know, as well looking ahead. . So the GDP and PDFP numbers came in pretty much right where we expected them to come in. You’ve got to look at the whole picture. So, certainly, as I mentioned in my opening remarks, economic activity data, GDP, private domestic final purchases—which we think is a narrower but better signal for future, for where the economy is going—has come down to a little better than 1 percent, 1.2 percent I think, in the case of GDP for the first half, whereas it was 2½ last year. So that has certainly come down. But if you look at the labor market, what you see is, by many, many statistics, the labor market is kind of still in balance. It’s things like quits, you know, job openings, and—let alone the unemployment rate. They’re all very—by many measures, very similar to where they were a year ago. So you do not see a weakening in the labor market. You do see a slowing in job creation, but also in a slowing—a slowing in the supply of workers. So you’ve got a labor market that’s in balance, albeit partially because both demand and supply for workers has—is coming down at the same pace, and that’s why the unemployment rate has remained roughly, roughly stable, which is why I said there—we do see downside risk in the labor market. I mean, our two—our two mandate variables— right?—are inflation and maximum employment—stable prices and maximum employment, not so much growth. So the labor market looks, looks solid. Inflation is above target. And even if you—if you look through the tariff effects, we think it’s still a bit above target. And that’s why our stance is where it is. But, as I mentioned, you know, downside risks to the labor market are certainly apparent. . You know, the, the main number you have to look at now is the unemployment rate, because if, if—it’s true that the, you know, demand for workers in the form of, let’s call it—say—just say, payroll jobs—that number has come down, but so has the breakeven number, kind of in tandem. So, you know, as long as the—that puts the labor market in, in balance. The fact that it’s getting into balance due to declines in both supply and demand, though, I think does—it is suggestive of downside risk. So we’re—of course, we’ll be watching that carefully. . So on, on the dissents, you know, what you—what you want from everybody and also from a dissenter is a clear explanation for—of what your thinking is and what are the arguments you’re making. And that’s—we had that today. So I think, basically, this was—this was quite a good meeting all around the table where people were—you know, thought carefully about this and put their positions out there. As I mentioned, you know, the, the—sort of the majority of the Committee was of the view that inflation’s a bit above target, maximum employment is at target. That calls for modestly restrictive—in my way of thinking, a modestly restrictive stance of policy for now. But we had two dissenters who, I think—you know, you want that clear thinking and, and, and, you know, expression of your thinking, and we certainly had that today, I think all around the table. In terms of—you asked about the June SEP. You know, I wouldn’t—you’re right that that’s what it—that’s what it says, and that may—that may well—I, I couldn’t point to it six weeks later as, as expressing people’s thought—you really can’t do that. We don’t run an SEP, and I don’t like to substitute in my own estimate of what the SEP might be. We don’t have one. So I’ll just say that, you know, we, we haven’t made any decisions about September. We’ll be monitoring all the incoming data and asking ourselves whether the federal funds rate is in the right place. . So let me say, my own estimate is modestly restrictive. And there are—there are a range of views of what the neutral rate is at this moment for, for our economy. And so others may say it’s more restrictive or less restrictive even. You know, we’re—we’re going to be—at some point, when we return to moving toward a more neutral stance, we’ll be making that judgment as we go. I don’t think we have a preset course. It’s not so mechanical as saying, you know, “We’ve derived with great confidence the neutral rate, and that is our destination,” because, really, we understand that no one actually knows what the neutral rate is. We know it by its works, and that will be how—the way the economy reacts over time to—you know, to slightly looser policy. . I think you have to think of this as still quite early days. And so I think what we’re seeing now is substantial amounts of tariff revenue being collected, on the order of $30 billion a month, which is, you know, substantially higher than, than before. And the evidence seems to be, mostly not paid, but paid only to a small extent, through exporters lowering their price. And companies or retailers, sort of people who are upstream—institutions that are upstream from the consumer, are paying most of this for now. Consumers are—it’s starting to show up in consumer prices. As you know, in the June report, we expect to see more of that. And we know from surveys that companies feel that they have every intention of, of, of putting this through to the consumer. But, you know, the truth is, they may not be able to in many cases. So I think it’s—we’re just going to have to watch and learn empirically how much of this and over what period of time. I think we’ve learned that the process will probably be slower than, than expected at the beginning, but we never expected it to be fast. And we think we have a long way to go to really understand exactly how we’ll be. So that’s how we’re thinking of it right now. . You could argue we are, a bit, “looking through” goods inflation by not raising rates. You know, we haven’t reacted to, to new inflation. But, I mean, I wouldn’t—I wouldn’t insist upon that. But I don’t think—I think the base case—I said—as I said, a reasonable base case is that these are one time—one time price effects. Of course, in the end, there, there will not be. This will not turn out to be inflation, because we’ll make sure that it’s not. We will, through our tools, make sure that this does not move from being a one time price increase to serious inflation. We want to do that efficiently, though, efficiently. And that means we want to do it—if you—if you move too soon, you wind up maybe not getting inflation all the way fixed, and you have to come back. That’s inefficient. If you move too late, you might do too—unnecessary damage to the labor market. So there won’t be, in the end, a big inflationary problem. What we’re trying to do is accomplish that in a way that is efficient. But in the end, there should be no doubt that we will do what we need to do to keep inflation under control. Ideally, we do it efficiently. . So, of course, let me just—ritual disclaimer that we don’t express any judgments or anything, right, on, on fiscal legislation or other legislation, for that matter. But I would say, when you think that, you know, the biggest part of the bill was, was making permanent existing law on, on taxes, I don’t think we see it as particularly stimulative. There should be some stimulative effect, but it shouldn’t be significant over the next couple of years. . No, that’s—you know, we, we have a mandate, and that’s maximum employment and price stability. And it is—it’s not something we do, to consider the cost to the government of our rate changes. We have to be able to look at the goal variables Congress has given us—use the tools they have given us to achieve those goals. And that’s what we do. It’s—we don’t consider the fiscal needs of the federal government. No advanced economy central bank does that. And it wouldn’t be good for—if we did do that, it would be good neither for our credibility nor for the credibility of U.S. fiscal policy. So it’s just not something we, we take into consideration. . Not for me to say. I will say, we had a—we had a nice visit with the President. It was an honor to host him. It’s not something that happens very often at the Federal Reserve—to have the President come over, let alone to visit a building—but it was—it was a good visit. . So, you know, we—this project was hatched and conceived almost a decade ago now, and we went through the very long process of clearing it through historic preservation at the National Capital Planning Commission and a lot of back and forth there. It was very constructive. We started out to do the work, and we’re very well along on that work. And I was quite pleased to have the President say multiple times that what he really wanted to see was, was us getting this construction completed as soon as possible. That is our focus, and that’s what we’re going to do. . So inflation—when you talk about these 12 month inflation measures, you’re always battling residual seasonality. So we’ll have, for example, two months of high inflation, sometimes early in the year, and then inflation turns lower. And a lot of that may just be an artifact. So that’s why we look at the 12 month numbers. I—look, I think inflation is most of the way back to 2 percent. There are things like the catch up inflation. So, for example, all the insurance costs that are now—they’re only now going through inflation, but they actually reflect inflationary pressures from two, three years ago. So there’s—that’s got to go through. In addition, now we have, you know, three  or four tenths of inflation in core inflation from tariffs. So—and we, we, we can’t really separate that out. We’re not going to have a separate, you know, kind of inflation that isn’t the tariffs. We’re always going to be dealing with the whole—all of inflation. But we—the composition, as I mentioned, has really changed. And, you know, if you go back to the last couple of years, it was all about services inflation, which was being very sticky. Now services inflation is coming down nicely. Goods inflation was well behaved before, and now goods inflation is going up. So the story has really changed. That’s partially because of tariffs. It’s also partially because we had restrictive policy in place, and we—and we’ve seen that—the result of that gradually work its way through the services economy. . I’m not going to comment on the Administration’s proposal. I do think—as I’ve said, I think that we—you know, we’re, we’re getting the data that we need to do our jobs. And I think it’s really important that, that good data helps not just the Fed—it helps the government, but it also helps the private sector. You know, people in the economy—they, they use this data a lot, too. So it’s quite important for our economy and, certainly, for the Fed’s work and other government agencies’ work that we—that we continue to get better at data. That’s what we’ve been doing for 100 years. We’ve been getting better and better and better. It’s very hard to accurately capture in real time the output of a $20 plus trillion economy. And the United States has been a leader in that for 100 years, and we really need to continue that, in my view. . How concerned am I that the—say that again. . The wait and see approach—what do you mean by that? . Well, so that—you know, that would—that’s where we’re—policy’s restrictive. When we start cutting, it’ll go toward neutral. . Well, what, what may be giving—it’s not our policy stance. What may be giving—some companies will certainly be taking advantage of the fact of the tariffs and all of the discussion of how they’re going to—you know, companies will raise prices when and as they can. And you—so you saw it famously in the—in the—in the first Administration of President Trump, during those tariffs. Washing machines were tariffed, but, but, but dryers weren’t. But what do you know? Price—the price of dryers went up, too, just like washing machines. So companies will often just take—they’ll cross the street in a group, if you know what I mean. That’ll happen. We don’t see a lot of that. I mean, what we see now is basically the very beginnings of whatever the effects turn out to be on goods inflation. And, you know, I’ll say again, they may be—they may be less than, than people estimate or more than people estimate. They’re not going to be zero. Consumers will pay some of this. Businesses will pay some of this. Retailers will pay some of this. But, you know, we’re just going to have to, to see it through. . Well, so the housing—the housing is a—is a special case. Right? Our—we don’t set—we don’t set mortgage rates at the Fed, right? We set an overnight rate, and the rates that go into mortgages are longer term rates, like Treasury rates—it might be 30 year rates, it might be shorter than that, but it’s not the overnight Fed’s rate. It’s not that we don’t have any effect. We do have an effect, but we’re not the main effect. There are other things go—though, going on in the housing sector. And one of those is just, there’s kind of a long term housing shortage that we have. We haven’t built enough housing. This is not something the Fed can help with, but then that’ll be the case even after things normalize. So I, I think the best thing that we can do for housing is to have 2 percent inflation and maximum employment. And that’s the—that’s what we can contribute to housing. There are lots of other jobs to do for the private sector and Congress, but that’s what we’re trying to get to. And, I mean, we’ve made a lot of progress toward that. We’re in—we have a very good labor market right now. Inflation—we were very close to 2 percent. We’re seeing some goods inflation move us away but, so far, not very far away. . I mean, ultimately, it’s—it could be any—it could be any of those things. Right? But, but, you know, if you saw that the risks to the two goals were moving into balance, if they were fully in balance, that would imply that you should move toward a more—a more neutral stance of policy. This is—this is the special situation we’re in, which is, we have two sided risk, risk to both of our goals. When we paused, inflation was above target, and the labor market was pretty good. So, so, you know, that was a time when policy—policy was restrictive when we paused. And to be restrictive is to be—to be supporting a return to our inflation target, right? So as the two targets get back into balance, you would—you would think you’d move in, in, in a way closer to neutral and that the next—the next steps that we take are likely to be in that direction. What will it take? You know, it’ll just take—it’ll be the totality of the evidence. As I mentioned, there’s quite a lot of data coming in, which, before the next meeting, will it be dispositive of that? I—you know, it’s really hard to say. We don’t make those decisions right now. So we’ll have to see. . I think—we’ll, we’ll, we’ll look at everything. You know, it’s—as I mentioned, you know, a pretty reasonable base case is that this will be a one time price increase. And, in the end, we’ll make sure that that’s the case. We’re just trying to do that efficiently. We’re—and “efficiently” means getting the timing right so we don’t—again, if we go—if we cut rates too soon, maybe we didn’t finish the job with inflation. There’s—history is dotted with examples of that. If you cut too late, then maybe you’re doing unnecessary damage to the labor market. So we’re trying to—we’re trying to get that timing right, and that’s effectively what we’re doing. . So this goes back to the division of labor between the Fed and the Treasury—as you, I’m sure, know—and, you know, the, the, the Treasury only speaks to the— speaks to the dollar. It’s not—it’s not something that’s been a topic of, of, you know, major discussion at all at, at—at the—at the Fed. I won’t say it doesn’t come up. The [FOMC meeting] transcripts, when they come out in a few years—they’ll probably reflect some mentions of the dollar. But it would never be a, a major focus. . Yeah, we’re—so we’re monitoring the situation. We do, of course— I mean, as you know, during the pandemic, we looked at a whole lot of new kinds of data. People are looking at big data sets that you can get from all sorts of places. And we do all of that. But at the same—we really need—the government data really is the gold standard in data, and we need it to be—you know, to be good and be able to rely on it. And we’re not going to be able to substitute for that. But if—we have to make do with what we have, but I certainly hope that we get what we need. . I’ll just say that—so I, I think that having an independent central bank has been an institutional arrangement that has served the public well. And as long as it serves the public well, it should continue and be respected. If it didn’t serve the public well, then, then it wouldn’t be something that we should just automatically defend. But what it gives us and other central banks—what it gives you is the ability to make these, these very challenging decisions that—in ways that are focused on the data and the evolving outlook, the balance of risks, and all the things we talk about, and not political factors. And so governments all over the advanced economy world have chosen to put a little bit of distance between direct political control of those decisions and the decisionmakers. So if you—if you were—if you weren’t—if you were not to have that, that would be a great temptation, of course, to, to use interest rates to affect elections, for example. And that’s something that, that we don’t want to do. So I think that’s pretty widely understood. Certainly, it is in Congress. And, I mean—I mean, I think it’s very important. I’ll just say that. . Consumer spending had been very, very strong for the last couple of years and had—repeatedly, forecasters, not just us, had been forecasting it would slow down. And now maybe it finally has. So I would say, you know, if you talk to credit card companies, for example, they will tell you that the consumer is in solid shape and that spending is at a healthy level. It’s not growing rapidly, but it’s at a healthy level. And delinquencies are not, not a problem. You mentioned high end delinquencies. I don’t know what to make of that. I read the same thing. But—so, generally—and if you look at the banks and when the banks talk about in their earnings calls, their—the performance of credit has been good. So, essentially, you, you have a consumer that’s in good shape and is spending, not at a rapid rate. But it, it, it’s true. And it was, again, right in line with what we expected, the GDP data that we got this week. So—and I think it’s still a little bit difficult to interpret, because you have these massive swings in net exports, which, which may also be affecting—you know, some of that can be affected by—can affect consumer spending as well. Look, we—it’s one of the data points that we pay most careful attention to, and there’s no question that it’s slowed. And, you know, we’re watching it closely. But we also watch the labor market and the performance of inflation. Those are our two—those are our two variables that we’re assigned to maximize. . So I’m not going to talk about any individual’s—you know, any individual’s comments. I wouldn’t do that. But, look, I think what we know is that private  sector job creation, you know, certainly in the last report—we’ll see on Friday—but had come down a bit. And, and if you—if you take the QCEW adjustment seriously, with it—it may be even low—maybe close to zero. But the unemployment rate is still—was still low. So, what that’s telling you is that, that, you know, demand for workers is slowing, but so is the supply. So that’s a—it’s in balance, oddly enough. You’ve got a very low unemployment rate, and it’s kind of been there for a year as job creation has moved down, but also we know that, you know, because of immigration policy really, the flow into our labor forces is just a great deal slower. And those two things have slowed more or less in tandem. If you look at things, like I mentioned, quits, look at wages—wages are gradually cooling—look at vacancies to unemployment, those things have been pretty stable for—they haven’t really moved a lot in a full year. So I think if you take the totality of the labor market data, you’ve got a solid labor market. But I think you have to see that there are downside risks. It’s not—you don’t see weakening in the labor market, but I think you’ve got downside risks in a world where unemployment’s being held down because both demand and supply are declining. I think that’s—it’s worth paying close attention to it, and we are. . Sure. So, you know, we have—we have an economic go round, where people talk about the economy, and then the next—to—then to—that’s yesterday. And then today, we have a monetary policy go round, all the way around the table—everyone gives their views. So the discussion around policy was—the majority view was, was still what it has been, which is that inflation is running above target, maximum employment is right at target. That means policy, policy should be a little bit restrictive, somewhat restrictive, because we want—we want inflation to, to move all the way back to its target. So that’s where people have been and still are. Two of our members felt that the time had come to cut and that they—for the reasons that they’re—they’re going to express. I won’t tell you the reasons. They—they’ll issue some kind of a—of a thing in the next day or so. So—but that’s the story. And I would say, you know, well argued, very thoughtfully argued all around the table, good arguments. And, you know, it’s a situation where—an unusual situation. The economy is in—is in, you know, good shape, but it’s an unusual situation where you have risks to both your employment mandate and your inflation. That’s the nature of a supply shock. And it’s probably not surprising that there would be differences and different perspectives on that as well as different views of where the neutral rate is, so they—different views of how tight policy is. So we have those. I will say, what you hope is that people, you know, explain their, their positions very thoughtfully and clearly. And we absolutely had that today all the way around the table. I would call it one of the better meetings I can recall from that standpoint. . It’s not, not quite the way I would put it. You know, I said that’s why we think policy should, should be restrictive, is because, you know, inflation is above target. When we—when we have risks to both goals—one of them is farther away from goal than the other, and that’s inflation. Maximum employment’s at goal. So you have to—that means policy should be tight because tight policy is what brings inflation down. If you came to the view that the risks to the two were more in balance, that would imply that policy shouldn’t be restrictive, it should be more neutral—more, more, you know, a neutral stance. And that would be somewhat lower than where we are now. No one knows exactly where that is. So that’s—that’s the framework I think I’d be taking. And, you know, we’ll just have to see. We’re going to be obviously looking at a lot of data in the next cycle. It is one of the cycles where we have two employment and two inflation reports, and we’ll see where that takes us. . It’s going to be the total—hard to answer that specifically. PDFP, I think, for the first half—private domestic final purchases, or final sales, as people call it—was 1.6 on the first half. GDP, I believe, was 1.2 percent. So that’s the whole half. You mentioned the quarters. So those are slower. But, you know, GDP is bumpy quarter to quarter, half to half, and often gets revised, you know, after the fact. The labor market data, we, we still think, is— continue to think, is the best data we have on the economy. And that shows a 4.1 percent unemployment rate. It shows wages, you know, still at a healthy level, but moving ever closer to what we would regard as long run sustainable, consistent with longer run productivity and 2 percent inflation. So the labor market is actually still quite solid. Inflation is above target. Even ignoring tariffs, it’s a little bit above target. And tariffs—so we’re watching all of that and, again, trying to—trying to do the right thing in what is a challenging situation, because you’re being pulled in two directions and you have to decide which of those it took to go in. And, actually, at some point, if they’re—if they’re sort of equally at risk, then you really want to be at a neutral policy stance, which we’re not right now. . I’m not going to—I’m not going to say that. No. I, I, I just think we’re going to need to see the data, and it can go in many different directions—the inflation data and, and the employment data. And we’ll just—we’re going to make a judgment based on all of the data and based on that balance of risks analysis that I mentioned. . Sorry, I do not have any update for you. Thanks very much, everyone.

